            Melanoidins from coffee and lipid peroxidation
                                      Davide Tagliazucchi



Corresponding author. Dr Davide Tagliazucchi: Department of Life Sciences, University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Amendola 2, 42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy
Telephone: +39-0522-522060; fax: +39-0522-522027 E-mail: davide.tagliazucchi@unimore.it




Departmental-Institutional contact: Ms Silvia Ceretti, Department of Life Sciences, University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Amendola 2, 42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy
Telephone: +39-0522-522051; fax: +39-0522-522027 E-mail: silvia.ceretti@unimore.it



Abbreviated version of the title/ running title: Coffee melanoidins and lipid peroxidation



Word count (excluding facing page, abstract, and references):

4926 words,
1 table,
5 figures,
44 references




                                                                                               1
ABSTRACT

Dietary lipid oxidation products are thought to be an important risk factor in the development of

cardiovascular diseases. Lipid oxidation products may be already present in oxidized food and they

may be generated during digestion of highly oxidizable food such as meat. In vitro and in vivo

studies are consistent for a role of coffee high molecular weight melanoidins in the prevention of

oxidative damage. Since coffee melanoidins are poorly bioavailable, the gastro-intestinal tract itself

might constitute their main biological site of action where they reach high concentrations following

coffee consumption. In the stomach they inhibit the peroxidation of meat lipids, decreasing the

synthesis of hydroperoxides and secondary lipoxidation products. The reduction in the formation of

these pro-atherogenic compounds has been shown to be followed by a decrease in their absorption

in the human volunteers. The ability of coffee melanoidins to inhibit lipid peroxidation may

contribute to their health benefits, since dietary oxidized lipid and advanced lipid oxidation

endproducts are involved in the development of atherosclerosis and other diseases.



Key Words. Coffee melanoidins, lipid peroxidation, stomach, lipid hydroperoxide, antioxidants,

meat, advanced lipid oxidation endproducts, diet, cardiovascular diseases.




                                                                                                     2
List of abbreviations.

ROS, reactive oxygen species;

ALEs, advanced lipid oxidation endproducts;

MDA, malondialdehyde;

4-HNE, 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal;

LDL, low-density lipoprotein;

LOOH, lipid hydroperoxide;

ABTS, 2,2’-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) radical cation;

DPPH, 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical;

AAPH, 2,2’-azinobis-(2-amidinopropane)-dihydrochloride;

LH, linoleic acid;

L·, lipid radical;

LOO·, alkylperoxyl radical;

TBA-RS, thiobarbituric reactive substance;

t-BOOH, tert-butylhydroperoxide;

MRPs; Maillard reaction products.




                                                                               3
INTRODUCTION

Increasing evidence supports the hypothesis that lipid oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation and

oxidative damage in the human body play a major role in developing most oxidative stress-related

diseases.

Oxidative stress may be defined as an imbalance between the production of oxidants and the

capacity of endogenous antioxidants systems to prevent oxidative damage that occur in the cell.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anion and hydroxyl radical are among the most

important oxidants generated during the oxidative stress condition. These free radicals can affect

cell homeostasis causing damage to proteins, DNA and lipids

Lipids (cholesterol and polyunsaturated fatty acids) are particularly vulnerable to oxidation initiated

by free radicals. Lipid oxidation progress through an autocatalytic process that leads to the

production and the accumulation of lipid oxidation products, in particular oxysterols and

hydroperoxides. The latter can subsequently undergo fragmentation, generating a variety of highly

reactive aldehydes, such as 2-alkenals (acrolein), 4-hydroxy-2-alkenals (4-hydroxy-2-nonenal, 4-

HNE) and ketoaldehydes (including malondialdehyde (MDA) and glyoxal), collectively known as

advanced lipid oxidation endproducts (ALEs). Some of these products can spread easily and

amplify the damage to DNA and protein initiated by ROS.



LIPID PEROXIDATION AND DISEASES

Lipid oxidation and ALEs have been linked to the pathogenesis of several diseases [1,2]. Lipid

peroxidation occurs in all human neurodegenerative diseases. Lipid peroxidation products including

free 4-HNE, acrolein, isoprostanes as well as 4-HNE and acrolein protein adducts are elevated in

Alzheimer’s diseased brains [3]. 4-HNE covalently modifies amyloid β peptide via 1,4-conjugate

addition, and can crosslink amyloid β peptides to each other, triggering its aggregation and




                                                                                                      4
accelerating the formation of protofibrils [4]. Both 4-HNE and acrolein are neurotoxic in a time- and

concentration-dependent manner for hippocampal cultured cells [1].

Elevated levels of 4-HNE protein adduct were also found in subjects with Parkinson disease and

amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [1].

Oxidative stress and lipid oxidation play also an important role in the pathogenesis of

atherosclerosis. LDL oxidation leads to the formation of peroxidized lipids which can breakdown

into reactive aldehyde that are responsible for the oxidative damage to the LDL apoprotein [5].

Oxidized phospholipids are present in oxidized LDL, accumulate in atherosclerotic lesions and are

able to trigger vascular inflammation and pro-atherogenic reactions [6]. 4-HNE- and MDA-adducts

are detected in atherosclerotic lesions [1,2]. ALEs react with apoprotein B, altering its structure and

increasing its affinity for the scavenger receptors in macrophages leading to massive cholesterol

accumulation [7]. There is also evidence that oxycholesterols are angiotoxic, pro-inflammatory and

pro-atherogenic [8].

It is still unclear how and when LDL are oxidized. It has been suggested that LDL may be oxidized

directly in the sub-intima space of the arterial wall [9] and/or oxidized in other sites and transferred

from plasmatic circulation to the atherosclerotic lesions [10]. The pro-atherogenic oxidized LDL in

the circulation are partially derived from oxidized lipids in the diet [11]. Oxidized fatty acids and

oxidized cholesterols in the diet are absorbed in the small intestine and transferred into the

chylomicrons [12,13]. Oxidized chylomicrons are not considered potentially atherogenic, but the

oxidized remnants can increase the atherogenic risk by depositing itself in the vessel wall and

increasing the oxidative stress [14]. While the oxidized fatty acids are not transferred to other

lipoproteins, oxidized cholesterol is directly transferred from chylomicrons to LDL in the

circulation contributing, at least partially, to the formation of oxidized LDL [12,13].




                                                                                                           5
Also dietary ALEs, such as MDA, can be absorbed and accumulated in human plasma after meat

consumption [15]. MDA from the diet causes oxidative LDL post-prandial modification in humans
[16]
       .



SOURCES OF DIETARY LIPID OXIDATION PRODUCTS AND ADVANCED LIPID

OXIDATION ENDPRODUCTS

The first source of dietary oxidized lipid and ALEs is represented by the oxidative reaction that

occurs during processing, storage and cooking of food, especially in meat products.

In food, free ferrous iron is a primary catalyst for the initiation of lipid peroxidation because of its

ability to generate hydroxyl radical from oxygen. Low concentrations of reducing agents, such as

ascorbic acid, drives the reduction of ferric to ferrous iron promoting lipid peroxidation in muscle

tissue. On the other hand, heme-containing proteins (such as myoglobin and hemoglobin) as well as

iron-oxygen complexes (ferryl and oxo-ferryl radicals) are also considered as initiators of lipid

peroxidation in meat and meat products [17].

The primary compounds formed during lipid oxidation are lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH) whose

concentration can reach 200 μM in cooked meat [18]. The level of lipid hydroperoxides greatly

increases after cooking. Kanner and Lapidot [18] found that the level of lipid hydroperoxides in

cooked red turkey meat was about 100-fold higher than the value found in raw red turkey meat.

The LOOH and lipid free radicals generated during the oxidative reaction produce ALEs (MDA,

acrolein, and 4-HNE) and are able to co-oxidize a variety of vitamins (A, E, and C) and cholesterol
[19]
       . The concentration of ALEs in meat and fish products could exceed 300 μM [20].

The amount of oxidized cholesterol increases during cooking, depending on the type and time of

cooking, and frozen storage in meat products and can reach concentrations of 10 to 100 μM [20].

The second source of dietary oxidized lipid and ALEs is the stomach. The idea of the stomach as a

“bioreactor” in which the lipid oxidation is enhanced, was first proposed by Kanner and co-workers



                                                                                                           6
[18,19]
          . The gastric fluid, which contains dissolved oxygen and has a low pH, is an optimal medium

for further dietary lipid oxidation in meat. The amount of LOOH in meat incubated in the gastric

fluid for 3 hours at pH 3 increased from 6 to 8-fold, with a final concentration ranging from 500 to

1200 μM, depending on the types of meat [18,21,22]. ALEs are formed during the gastric digestion of

meat. Their concentration, measured as MDA equivalent increase by more than 2-fold during meat

incubation in gastric fluid reaching concentration of more than 100 μM [16,21-23].

Typically, lipid peroxidation in gastric fluid occurs in the presence of catalysts, such as free iron

ions, free heme group or heme-containing peptides/proteins such as metmyoglobin. We studied the

role of non-heme iron on gastric lipid peroxidation by incorporating EDTA in the simulated gastric

digestion of turkey meat [21,22]. The maximum amount of inhibition in the formation of

hydroperoxides in the gastric fluid was 68.7% at EDTA concentration of 0.4 mM. The increase in

EDTA concentration did not cause a further increase in the inhibition. These results suggest that

lipid peroxidation in turkey meat is affected mainly by non-heme iron. However, a significant part

of lipid peroxidation seems to be independent of free iron ion and attributable to the catalytic role of

heme iron.

Pepsin activity is important for gastric lipid peroxidation since the omission of pepsin from the

simulated gastric fluid cause an inhibition of about 55% in the level of hydroperoxides after 180

minutes of gastric digestion of turkey meat [21,22]. This “prooxidant effect” of pepsin may be due to

the liberation from digested proteins of transition metals such as iron and copper that are initiators

of lipid peroxidation. Moreover, an enhanced prooxidative activity of metmyoglobin was seen after

pepsin hydrolysis, suggesting that myoglobin fragments with high prooxidative activity are formed

under conditions of proteolysis [24].




                                                                                                         7
COFFEE MELANOIDINS: STRUCTURE AND BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY

Melanoidins are generically defined as brown-coloured, nitrogen-containing high molecular weight

(usually more than 5 KDa) compounds formed in the last stage of the Maillard reaction. In coffee,

melanoidins are formed during the roasting process and are responsible for the coffee colour.

The mean melanoidins content in roasted coffee powder is 7.2% whereas in the coffee brew the

melanoidins concentration ranges between 1.7 and 4.3 g/l depending on the method of preparation
[25]
       . Polysaccharides (mainly galactomannans and arabinogalactans), proteins, and chlorogenic

acids, contribute to the formation of coffee melanoidins, although most of the weight of the coffee

melanoidins (up to 90%) is composed of unknown material [26]. Some low molecular weight

compounds (chlorogenic acids and low molecular weight Maillard reaction products) have been

found to be ionically linked to the melanoidin core [27]. Despite the many efforts made in recent

years, the chemical structure of melanoidins is largely unknown and different melanoidin

populations may coexist within the coffee with different abundances in the different melanoidin

populations [33]. Due to the complexity of the melanoidins population in coffee, the approach for the

isolation of coffee melanoidins take advantage of their molecular weight. The most utilized involve

the use of dialysis tubing or ultrafiltration apparatus with a molecular weight cut-off of 5-10 KDa
[26]
       .

The estimated daily intake of coffee melanoidins ranges between 200 to 2600 mg per capita per day

with an estimated worldwide intake of about 900 mg per capita per day [25]. The daily intake,

however, could be much higher for heavy coffee drinkers (> 6 cups per day) which can easily reach

more than 5 g of coffee melanoidins per day [25].

Considering the high intake of coffee melanoidins, their biological activity and potential impact on

human health is a topic of great interest. Different in vitro biological activities have been attributed

to coffee melanoidins, namely, antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antiglycative and




                                                                                                           8
antihypertensive activities as well as the ability to inhibit matrix metalloproteases and to modulate

the bacterial colonic population [26].

Two major factors limit so far the actual physiological relevance of the biological activities of

coffee melanoidins. First, the limited knowledge of the structure of the coffee melanoidins makes it

difficult to identify the active principles responsible for the specific biological activity.

Most studies have been carried out using the high molecular weight material (usually higher than 10

KDa) isolated from coffee without further purification. Secondly, although melanoidins are

consumed regularly as part of the daily human diet, they are generally considered as poorly

absorbable and bio-available compounds [28]. The absorption of the melanoidins is dependent of

their molecular weight and solubility. The absorption of the low molecular weight and water soluble

melanoidins seems to be favoured. In rats 70 to 90% of orally ingested high molecular weight

melanoidins are excreted in the faeces, and only 1 to 5% absorbed and excreted in the urine [28].

Regarding coffee melanoidins, no study has been conducted in order to determine their

bioavailability and metabolism in vivo and, so far, there is no evidence for the ability of coffee

melanoidins to cross intact the intestinal mucosal barrier.

For the reasons above stated, it is unlikely that coffee melanoidins could act as biologically active

compounds in the bloodstream or organs. More important, most of the consumed melanoidins

remain in the gastrointestinal tract, therefore, it may be a key site for their antioxidant and

biological action. In addition, coffee high molecular weight melanoidins seem not to be degraded in

the first portion of the gastrointestinal tract [28, 29].

In the last ten years some studies have suggested that they can play a relevant role in the

gastrointestinal tract.

Coffee melanoidins act as prebiotic, promoting selective bacterial growth in the colon [30].

Also, they can have a role in the protection against cancer development in the colon by inhibiting

matrix metalloproteases [31]. Indeed, the coffee melanoidins fermented by human faecal bacteria



                                                                                                        9
retain antioxidant activity [30]. The high molecular weight coffee melanoidins can also act as

inhibitors of lipid peroxidation in the stomach, suggesting a role in the prevention of oxidative

damage [21].

The rest of this chapter focuses on the antioxidant activity of coffee melanoidin with special

emphasis on the ability of these compounds to inhibit lipid peroxidation.



COFFEE MELANOIDINS AS RADICAL SCAVENGERS, METAL CHELATORS AND

LIPID PEROXIDATION INHIBITORS

Several studies carried out in recent years have shown that melanoidins extracted from coffee

possess antioxidant activity. The antioxidant activity of melanoidins isolated from the different

brews was studied using different methodologies. The techniques most frequently used, measured

the radical scavenging ability of coffee melanoidins against stable free radicals such as 2,2’-

azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) radical cation (ABTS) and 2,2-diphenyl-1-

picrylhydrazyl radical (DPPH). Delgado-Andrade et al. [32] showed that the radical scavenging

ability of coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration with a nominal cut-off of 10 KDa from

instant coffee was higher in the dark-roasted coffee using DPPH method. Data from the ABTS

method showed no significant differences in radical scavenging ability of coffee melanoidins as a

function of the degree of roasting. Also Del Pino-García [33] et al. found no differences in the radical

scavenging activity measured with the ABTS assay of instant coffee melanoidins (> 10 KDa) as a

function of the degree of roasting. However, they found a decrease in the DPPH radical scavenging

activity with the increasing degree of roasting. Conversely, Borrelli et al. [34] showed that the ABTS

radical scavenging activity of coffee melanoidins (isolated by gel filtration chromatography and

with a molecular weight between 1.2 and 4.7 KDa) decreased as the roasting severity increased

whereas no significant differences were observed with the DPPH assay. It is worth noting that




                                                                                                     10
comparisons between these studies should take into account differences in melanoidin isolation

protocols and in coffee brew used (espresso, filter coffee or instant coffee).

The contribution of high molecular weight melanoidins to the radical scavenging activity of coffee

brews range between 10 and 38% [29,33,35]. The radical scavenging activity of coffee melanoidins is

mainly due to the phenolic moieties incorporated and/or condensed in the melanoidin skeleton

during the roasting process [35]. The hypothesis was reinforced by the fact that a coffee melanoidin

fraction, obtained after hydrophobic chromatography of a > 3KDa fraction, rich in non-

carbohydrate and non-protein chromophore and phenolic moieties showed three- to four-fold higher

radical scavenging activity than the remaining high molecular-weight material [36]. In addition, low

molecular weight compounds ionically linked to the melanoidin core (phenolic groups and/ or low

molecular weight Maillard reaction products), released after incubation of high molecular weight

melanoidins with a molecular mass more than 10 KDa in 2M NaCl, exhibited higher radical

scavenging activity than the remaining polymeric material [29,32].

Among the different foods, coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration (> 10 KDa) exhibited six-

fold higher radical scavenging activity than traditional balsamic vinegar melanoidins and eight- and

eleven-fold higher radical scavenging activity than barley coffee and dark beer melanoidins,

respectively [21,22].

The radical scavenging activity of coffee melanoidins was also tested against the hydroxyl radical.

In this regard, coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration (> 10 KDa) were more efficient among

melanoidins from beers and sweet wine [37]. The hydroxyl radical scavenging ability of coffee

melanoidins was not affected by the degree of roasting [33].

Antioxidant properties of coffee melanoidins can result from their free radical scavenging activity

but their ability to chelate transition metal ions also play an important role. Coffee melanoidins are

able to bind Zn2+, Cu2+, and Fe2+ [26,38,39]. Most studies have focused on the ability of coffee

melanoidins to chelate ferrous iron. Coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration (> 10 KDa) were



                                                                                                     11
more efficient iron-chelators than melanoidins from beers, sweet wine, barley coffee and traditional

balsamic vinegar [21,22,39].

Free radical scavenging activity and metal-chelating ability are key factors for the capacity to

inhibit lipid peroxidation, therefore, it is not surprising that coffee melanoidins are efficient

inhibitors of lipid peroxidation.

Table 1 represents a summary of the in vitro and in vivo studies involving coffee melanoidins as

inhibitors of lipid peroxidation.

The anti-peroxidative activity of coffee melanoidins has been tested in different model systems. The

inhibition of linoleic acid (LH) oxidation in aqueous system has been extensively used. In this

system the peroxidation of LH is inititiated by a water-soluble molecules (2,2’-azinobis-(2-

amidinopropane)-dihydrochloride; AAPH) which produce a lipid radical (L·) which in the presence

of oxygen is converted into an alkylperoxyl free radical (LOO·). The LOO· free radical,

subsequently, abstracts a hydrogen atom from LH (propagation step) generating a new LOO· free

radical and a stable LOOH. This method is based on the rate of oxidation of LH to its conjugated

diene hydroperoxide in aqueous media in the presence or absence of the antioxidant compound [40].

In this system the lipid peroxidation is independent of the presence of transition metals and,

therefore, it is useful to study the chain-breaking activity of an antioxidant.

Borrelli et al. [34] showed that the ability of coffee melanoidins (isolated by gel filtration

chromatography and with a molecular weight between 1.2 and 4.7 KDa) to prevent lipid

peroxidation in LH system increased as the roasting severity increased. They also found that the

high molecular fraction of green coffee brew was completely ineffective in inhibiting LH oxidation.

In another study [27], the anti-peroxidative activity of coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration

(> 10 KDa) and tested against LH oxidation in an aqueous system was independent of the degree of

roasting. Coffee melanoidins (> 10 KDa) show higher anti-peroxidative activity than melanoidins

isolated from sweet wine and beers [40]. The anti-peroxyl radical activity of coffee melanoidins in



                                                                                                          12
LH systems is mainly due to the low molecular weight compounds ionically bound to the polymeric

melanoidins [27]. In the proposed mechanism of action [40], coffee melanoidins may react with LOO·

free radical instead of LH, reducing the propagation state of LH oxidation. Coffee melanoidins may

act as chain-breaking antioxidants, transferring a hydrogen atom to the free radical LOO· to

produce the stable LOOH and a stable melanoidin radical (reaction 1).



                       LOO· + M–OH →          LOOH + M–O·                  (1)



The anti-peroxyl radical activity of coffee melanoidins has also been evaluated ex vivo in a

biological system using rat liver microsomal preparations. The extent of lipid peroxidation was

assayed by measuring the thiobarbituric reactive substance (TBA-RS) after induction of oxidative

damage with an inititiator. The most active coffee melanoidins, isolated by dialysis (> 3.5 KDa) and

subsequent gel filtration chromatography, were found to be the medium and, especially, the lower

molecular weight melanoidins [41]. The inhibition of rat liver microsomal peroxidation decreased

from light- to dark-roasted coffee [33].

Lipid peroxidation inhibitory activity of coffee melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration (> 10 KDa)

and subjected to consecutive gastro-pancreatic digestion was assayed on human hepatoma HepG2

cells [42]. Coffee melanoidins showed protective effects on hepatoma cells submitted to oxidative

stress induced by the prooxidant tert-butylhydroperoxide (t-BOOH). Coffee melanoidins

completely abolished the formation of TBA-RS in the cells already at a concentration of 0.5 μg/mL.

More interestingly, the pre-treatment of hepatoma cells with 5-10 μg/mL of digested coffee

melanoidins completely avoided the t-BOOH-induced increase of TBARS. The cells were exposed

to the digested coffee melanoidins for 2 hours, followed by washing, so that the extracellular

presence of the coffee melanoidins was precluded when treatment with t-BOOH commenced. High




                                                                                                      13
molecular weight coffee melanoidins were found to be non-cytotoxic at concentrations upto 100

μg/mL.

Coffee melanoidins were also tested for their ability to inhibit copper induced oxidation of human

LDL [43]. LDL oxidation was spectrophotometrically monitored by measuring the formation of

conjugated diene at 234 nm. Coffee melanoidins resulted more effective than other thermally

processed food.



COFFEE MELANOIDINS INHIBIT LIPID PEROXIDATION DURING SIMULATED

DIGESTION OF MEAT

The ability of melanoidins isolated by ultrafiltration (> 10 KDa) from instant coffee to inhibit lipid

peroxidation was also tested in an in vitro model of gut during digestion of meat [21].

In our initial experiments, we examined whether coffee melanoidins were able to inhibit the

formation of LOOH during the in vitro gastric digestion of turkey meat. As shown in figure 1,

coffee melanoidins were able to decrease the lipid peroxidation during the simulated gastric

digestion of turkey meat and at a concentration of 3 mg/mL reversed the reaction and broke down

hydroperoxides to a concentration lower than the initial value. The anti-peroxidative activity of high

molecular weight coffee melanoidins is concentration-dependent. The time course of the

peroxidation of turkey meat in the presence of coffee melanoidins showed that at both the tested

concentrations, the inhibitory effect was already significant after 30 minutes of incubation.

We next examined the ability of coffee melanoidins to decrease the formation of ALEs measured as

TBA-RS (figure 2). The inhibitory effect was significant from 30 minutes for 3 mg/ml and only at

150 and 180 minutes for 1.5 mg/ml of coffee melanoidins. When coffee melanoidins were co-

incubated in the gastric fluid with turkey meat at 3 mg/ml concentration we found an inhibition of

91% in the TBA-RS formation.




                                                                                                     14
To gain more information on the mechanism of action of coffee melanoidins we tested the ability of

these compounds to scavenge free radicals and to chelate iron and heme, as well as their possible

effect on pepsin activity.

Firstly, instant coffee melanoidins are effective in scavenging ABTS radical cation (with a TEAC

value of 190 mg/g of melanoidins) through a hydrogen-atom transfer mechanism. Secondly, instant

coffee melanoidins are able to chelate ferrous ions (figure 3) and heme (figure 4). The Kd value for

Fe2+ binding was 3.8 mg/ml of melanoidin and the Hill coefficient was 2.6 suggesting the presence

of multiple Fe2+ binding sites in coffee melanoidins.

The binding of high molecular weight melanoidins with heme caused a reduction in the absorbance

of the Soret band at 400 nm (figure 4). The calculated Kd value was 0.2 mg/ml of melanoidin

showing that coffee melanoidins have a great affinity towards heme. The Hill coefficient higher

than one (1.52) indicates a positive cooperativity in the binding suggesting the presence of more

than one binding site for heme in food melanoidins.

Finally, coffee melanoidins were not able to inhibit pepsin activity.

On the basis of the above reported evidence, figure 5 shows the proposed mechanism of action for

the anti-peroxidative activity of coffee melanoidins in the in vitro gastric system. As shown, instant

coffee melanoidins may act at different levels. In the first step of the reaction (figure 5A) they

chelate Fe2+ ions and heme preventing the formation of alkoxyl radical and of the protonated ferryl

species (HmFe4+-OH) of heme. In the second step of the reaction, high molecular weight coffee

melanoidins act as radical scavengers (figure 5B) by reacting directly with peroxyl radical

preventing the propagation step.

It has been shown that the anti-peroxidative activity of coffee melanoidins is due to its high content

in phenolic groups [21]. Coffee melanoidins were more efficient in inhibiting lipid peroxidation

during the simulated digestion of turkey meat than melanoidins from dark beer, barley coffee and

traditional balsamic vinegar [21,22].



                                                                                                     15
IN VIVO EVIDENCE OF COFFEE MELANOIDINS AS INHIBITORS OF LIPID

PEROXIDATION

The in vivo evidence of the anti-peroxyl radical activity of coffee melanoidins are scarce but

increasing.

The first evidence that food-derived Maillard reaction products elicit anti-peroxidative properties in

humans was reported by Dittrich et al. [43]. The authors delivered to eight human subjects a diet

containing food rich in MRP. The first week of the diet was used as the wash-out period in which

roasted, baked and fried products were not consumed. In the second week of the intervention study

they administered to the subjects a diet rich in dark beer, bread crusts, and roasted coffee. It was

shown that the MRP-rich diet led to a statistically significant protection of isolated LDL against

copper-induced oxidation ex vivo. There are some limitations in the study. It is not possible to

understand which or what foods are most effective in vivo and it is not possible to discriminate the

possible effect of other components (such as polyphenols) present in the tested foods.

In a recent work, Kanner and co-worker [23] administered to human volunteers a meal consisting of

250 gr of fast-food meat and 200 mL of coffee beverage or water as control. The purpose of the

study was to verify if the simultaneous consumption of coffee and meat led to a reduction in the

absorption of ALEs. They measured the plasmatic level of MDA and found that the consumption of

roasted coffee during a meal of fast-food meat, resulted after 2 and 4 h, in the inhibition by 80% and

50%, respectively, of postprandial plasma MDA absorption. Although it was not possible

adequately to identify the molecules (polyphenols and/or melanoidins) responsible for the effect, in

vitro data [27] strongly support the idea that high molecular weight coffee melanoidins are mainly

responsible for the anti-peroxidative effect of coffee found in vivo.

In another study by Vitaglione et al. [44], coffee and its components (polyphenols and melanoidins

extracted by dialysis > 12 KDa) were studied for their ability to reduce liver damage and systemic



                                                                                                       16
lipid peroxidation in rats. Rats were fed with a high-fat diet and different beverages, coffee or a

solution of coffee polyphenols or a solution of coffee melanoidins. Coffee was able to reduce serum

MDA concentration by 26% compared to un-treated rats. Regarding the effect of coffee

components, although in the polyphenols-feeding rats a more pronounced effect on the serum levels

of MDA was observed (-20% compared to un-treated rats), even in melanoidins-feeding rats a slight

reduction in plasma levels of MDA was observed (-10% compared to un-treated rats).



CONCLUSION

In vitro and in vivo studies are consistent for a role of coffee high molecular weight melanoidins in

the prevention of oxidative damage. Numerous studies reported the in vitro radical scavenging

activity, chelating ability and antiperoxidative activity of coffee melanoidins. Due to their low

bioavailability, it is unlikely that coffee melanoidins can exert their protective effects at the

systemic level. More plausibly, coffee melanoidins can act at gastro-intestinal level where they

reach high concentration following coffee consumption. In the stomach they act as antioxidants and

metal chelators, inhibiting the peroxidation of meat lipids and decreasing the synthesis of

hydroperoxides and secondary lipoxidation products. The reduction in the formation of these pro-

atherogenic compounds has been shown to be followed by a decrease in their absorption in human

volunteers. The ability of melanoidins to inhibit lipid peroxidation may contribute to their health

benefits, since dietary oxidized lipid and ALEs are involved in the development of atherosclerosis

and other diseases.




                                                                                                      17
SUMMARY POINTS

  •   In vitro and in vivo studies are consistent for a role of coffee melanoidins in the prevention
      of oxidative damage.
  •   Lipid peroxidation has been linked to oxidative stress-related diseases.
  •   Dietary lipid oxidation products are a source of oxidized lipoproteins in the circulation.
  •   Dietary lipid oxidation products are present in cooked meat and their concentration
      dramatically increase during gastric digestion.
  •   Numerous studies report the in vitro radical scavenging activity, chelating ability and
      antiperoxidative activity of coffee melanoidins.
  •   Coffee melanoidins decrease the synthesis of hydroperoxides and secondary lipoxidation
      products during in vitro gastric digestion of meat
  •   Coffee consumption with meat bring about a decrease in the absorption of secondary
      lipoxidation products in human volunteers.




                                                                                                   18
REFERENCES



  1. Negre-Salvayre, A., Auge, N., Ayala, V., Basaga, H., Boada, J., Brenke, R., Chapple, S.,

     Cohen, G., Feher, J., Grune, T., Lengyel, G., Mann, G. E., Pamplona, R., Poli, G., Portero-

     Otin, M., Riahi, Y., Salvayre, R., Sasson, S., Serrano, J., Shamni, O., Siems, W., Siow, R. C.

     M., Wiswedel, I., Zarkovic, K., and Zarkovic, N. (2010). Pathological aspects of lipid

     peroxidation. Free Rad Res 44, 1125–1171.

  2. Uchida, K. (2000). Role of reactive aldehyde in cardiovascular diseases. Free Rad Biol Med

     28, 1685–1696.

  3. Butterfield, D. A., Bader Lange, M. L., and Sultana, R. (2010). Involvements of the lipid

     peroxidation product, HNE, in the pathogenesis and progression of Alzheimer’s disease.

     Biochim Biophys Acta 1801, 924–929.

  4. Siegel, S. J., Bieschke, J., Powers, E. T., and Kelly, J. W. (2007). The oxidative stress

     metabolite 4-hydroxynonenal promotes Alzheimer protofibril formation. Biochemistry 46,

     1503–1510.

  5. Etserbauer, H, Wag, G., and Puhl, H. (1993). Lipid peroxidation and its role in

     atherosclerosis. Br Med Bull 49, 566–576.

  6. Leitinger, N. (2005). Oxidized phospholipids as triggers of inflammation in atherosclerosis.

     Mol Nutr Food Res 49, 1063–1071.

  7. Kreuzer, J., White, A. L., Knott, T. J., Jien, M. L., Mehrabian, M., Scott, J., Young, S. G.,

     and Haberland, M. E. (1997). Amino terminus of apolipoprotein B suffices to produce

     recognition of malondialdehyde-modified low density lipoprotein by the scavenger receptor

     of human monocyte-macrophages. J Lipid Res 38, 324–342.




                                                                                                     19
8. Leonarduzzi, G., Sevanian, A., Sottero, B., Arkan, M. C., Biasi, F., Chiarpotto, E., Basaga,

   H., Poli, G. (2001). Up-regulation of the fibrogenic cytokine TGF-beta1 by oxysterols: a

   mechanistic link between cholesterol and atherosclerosis. FASEB J 15, 1619–1621.

9. Palinski, W., Rosenfeld, M. E., Ylä-Herttuala, S., Gurtner, G. C., Socher, S. S., Butler, S.

   W., Parthasarathy, S., Carew, T. E., Steinberg, D., and Witztum J. L. (1989). Low density

   lipoprotein undergoes oxidative modification in vivo. PNAS 86, 1372–1376.

10. Tsimikas, S., Aikawa, M., Miller Jr, F. J., Miller, E. R., Torzewski, M., Lentz, S. R.,

   Bergmark, C., Heistad, D. D., Libby, P., and Witztum, J. L. (2007). Increased plasma

   oxidized phospholipid:apolipoprotein B-100 ratio with concomitant depletion of oxidized

   phospholipids from atherosclerotic lesions after dietary lipid-lowering. Arterioscler Thromb

   Vasc Biol 27, 175–181.

11. Staprans, I., Pan, X. M., Rapp, J. H., and Feingold, K. R. (2005). The role of dietary

   oxidized cholesterol and oxidized fatty acids in the development of atherosclerosis. Mol

   Nutr Food Res 49, 1075–1082.

12. Staprans, I., Rapp, J. H., Pan, X. M., Kim., K. Y., and Feingold, K. R. (1994). Oxidized

   lipids in the diet are a source of oxidized lipid in chylomicrons of human serum. Arterioscler

   Thromb 14, 1900–1905.

13. Staprans, I., Pan, X. M., Rapp, J. H., and Feingold, K. R. (2003). Oxidized cholesterol in the

   diet is a source of oxidized lipoproteins in human serum. J Lipid Res 44, 705–715.

14. Zilversmit, D. B. (1979). Atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. Circulation 60, 473–

   485.

15. Gorelik, S., Ligumsky, M., Kohen, R., and Kanner, J. (2008). A novel function of red wine

   polyphenols in humans: prevention of absorption of cytotoxic lipid peroxidation products.

   FASEB J 22, 41–46.




                                                                                                  20
16. Gorelik, S., Kanner, J. Schurr, D., and Kohen, R. (2013). A rational approach to prevent

   postprandial modification of LDL by dietary polyphenols. J Funct Food 5, 163–169.

17. Min, B., and Ahn, D. U. (2005). Mechanism of lipid peroxidation in meat and meat

   products-A review. Food Sci Biotechnol 14, 152–163.

18. Kanner, J., and Lapidot, T. (2001). The stomach as a bioreactor: dietary lipid peroxidation in

   the gastric fluid and the effects of plant-derived antioxidants. Free Rad Biol Med 31, 1388–

   1395.

19. Gorelik, S., Lapidot, T., Shaham, I., Granit, R., Ligumsky, M., Kohen, R, and Kanner, J.

   (2005). Lipid peroxidation and coupled vitamin oxidation in simulated and human gastric

   fluid inhibited by dietary polyphenols: health implications. J Agric Food Chem 53, 3397–

   3402.

20. Kanner, J. (2007). Dietary advanced lipid oxidation endproducts are a risk factor to human

   health. Mol Nutr Food Res 51, 1094–1101.

21. Tagliazucchi, D., Verzelloni, E., and Conte, A. (2010). Effect of dietary melanoidins on

   lipid peroxidation during simulated gastro-intestinal digestion: their possible role in the

   prevention of oxidative damage. J Agric Food Chem 58, 2513–2519.

22. Verzelloni, E., Tagliazucchi, D., and Conte, A. (2010). From balsamic to healthy: traditional

   balsamic vinegar melanoidins inhibit lipid peroxidation during simulated gastro-intestinal

   digestion of meat. Food Chem Toxicol 48, 2097–2102.

23. Sirota, R., Gorelik, S., Harris, R., M., Kohen, R, and Kanner, J. (2013). Coffee polyphenols

   protect human plasma from postprandial carbonyl modifications. Mol Nutr Food Res 57,

   916–909.

24. Carlsen, C. U., and Skibsted, L. H. (2004). Myoglobin species with enhanced prooxidative

   activity is formed during mild proteolysis by pepsin. J Agric Food Chem 52, 1675–1681.




                                                                                                 21
25. Fogliano ,V., and Morales, F. J. (2011). Estimation of dietary intake of melanoidins from

   coffee and bread. Food Funct 2, 117–123.

26. Moreira, A. S. P., nunes, F. M., Domingues, M. R., and Coimbra, M. A., (2012). Coffee

   melanoidins: structure, mechanisms of formation and potential health impacts. Food Funct

   3, 903–915.

27. Delgado-Andrade, C., and Morales, F. J. (2005). Unravelling the contribution of

   melanoidins to the antioxidant activity of coffee brew. J Agric Food Chem 53, 1403–1407.

28. Faist, V., and Erbersdobler, H. F. (2001). Metabolic transit and in vivo effects of

   melanoidins and precursor compounds deriving from the Maillard reaction. Ann Nutr Met

   45, 1–12

29. Rufian-Henares, J. A., and Morales, F. J. (2007). Effect of in vitro enzymatic digestion on

   antioxidant activity of coffee melanoidins and fractions. J Agric Food Chem 55, 10016–

   10021.

30. Reichardt, N., Gniechwitz, D., Steinhart, H., Bunzel, M., and Blaut, M. (2009).

   Characterization of high molecular weight coffee fractions and their fermentation by human

   intestinal microbiota. Mol Nutr Food Res 53, 287–299.

31. de Marco, L. M., Fischer, S., and Henle, T. (2011). High molecular weight coffee

   melanoidins are inhibitors for matrix metalloproteases. J Agric Food Chem 59, 11417–

   11423.

32. Delgado-Andrade, C., Rufian-Henares, J. A., and Morales, F. J. (2005). Assessing the

   antioxidant activity of melanoidins from coffee brews by different antioxidant methods. J

   Agric Food Chem 53, 7832–7836.

33. Del Pino-García, R., González-SanJosé, M. L., Rivero-Pérez, M. D., and Muñiz, P. (2012).

   Influence of degree of roasting on the antioxidant capacity and genoprotective effect of




                                                                                                  22
   instant coffee: contribution of the melanoidin fraction. J Agric Food Chem 60, 10530–

   10539.

34. Borrelli, R. C., Visconti, A., Mennella, C., Anese, M., and Fogliano, V. (2002). Chemical

   characterization and antioxidant properties of coffee melanoidins. J Agric Food Chem 50,

   6527–6533.

35. Perrone, D., Farah, A., and Donangelo, C. M. (2012). Influence of coffee roasting on the

   incorporation of phenolic compounds into melanoidins and their relationship with

   antioxidant activity of the brew. J Agric Food Chem 60, 4265–4275.

36. Gniechwitz, D., Reichardt, N., Ralph, J., Blaut, M. Steinhart, H., and Bunzel, M., (2008).

   Isolation and characterisation of coffee melanoidin fraction. J Food Sci Agric 88, 2153–

   2160.

37. Morales, F. J. (2005). Assessing the non-specific hydroxyl radical scavenging properties of

   melanoidins in a Fenton-type reaction system. Anal Chim Acta 534, 171–176.

38. Takenaka, M., Sato, N., Asakawa, H., Wen, X., Murata, M., and Homma, S. (2005).

   Characterization of a metal-chelating substance in coffee. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 69,

   26–30.

39. Morales, F. J., Fernández-Fraguas, C., Jiménez-Pérez, S. (2005). Iron-binding ability of

   melanoidins from food and model systems. Food Chem 90, 821–827.

40. Morales, F. J., Jiménez-Pérez, S. (2004). Peroxyl radical scavenging activity of melanoidins

   in aqueous systems. Eur Food Res Technol 218, 515–520.

41. Daglia, M., Papetti, A., Aceti, C., Sordelli, B., Gregotti, C., and Gazzani, G. (2008).

   Isolation of high molecular weight components and contribution to the protective activity of

   coffee against lipid peroxidation in a rat liver microsome system. J Agric Food Chem 56,

   11653–11660.




                                                                                                 23
42. Goya, L., Delgado-Andrade, C., Rufián-Henares, J. A., Bravo, L., and Morales, F. J. (2007).

   Effect of coffee melanoidins on human heparoma hepG2 cells. Protection against oxidative

   stress induced by tert-butylhydroperoxide. Mol Nutr Food Res 51, 536–545.

43. Dittrich, R., Dragonas, C., Kannenkeril, D., Hoffmann, I., Mueller, A., Beckmann, M. W.,

   and Piscetsrieder, M. (2009). A diet rich in Maillard reaction products protects LDL against

   copper induced oxidation ex vivo, a human intervention trial. Food Res Int 42, 1315–1322.

44. Vitaglione, P., Morisco, F., Mazzone, G., Amoruso, D. C., Ribecco, M. T., Romano, A.,

   Fogliano, V., Caporaso, N., and D’Argenio, G. (2010). Coffee reduces liver damage in a rat

   model of steatohepatitis: the underlying mechanisms and the role of polyphenols and

   melanoidins. Hepatology, 52, 1652–1661.




                                                                                               24
FIGURE CAPTIONS

Title of Figure 1: Changes in the levels of hydroperoxides during incubation of homogenized

grilled turkey meat in simulated gastric fluid in presence of coffee melanoidins. Legend of Figure

1: The incubation at 37°C in absence of coffee melanoidins caused a 6.7-fold increase in the level

of hydroperoxides (●). When coffee melanoidins were incubated at 1.5 mg/ml (▲) or 3.0 mg/ml

(■) in simulated gastric fluid with the meat a significant inhibition in lipid peroxidation was

observed. Data are presented as mean ± SD for three parallels for each prepared sample. Adapted

with permission from Tagliazucchi et al. (2010) J Agric Food Chem 58, 2513–2519. Copyright

2010 American Chemical Society.

Title of Figure 2: Changes in secondary lipoxidation products (measured as TBA-RS)

concentration during incubation of homogenized grilled turkey meat in simulated gastric fluid in

presence of coffee melanoidins. Legend of Figure 2: The concentration of secondary lipoxidation

products increased about 2.5-fold during incubation of meat in simulated gastric fluid (■). The

addition of 1.5 mg/ml (■) or 3.0 mg/ml ( ) of coffee melanoidins significantly inhibited the

increase of TBA-RS. Data are presented as mean ± SD for three parallels for each prepared sample.

Adapted with permission from Tagliazucchi et al. (2010) J Agric Food Chem 58, 2513–2519.

Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.

Title of Figure 3: Fe2+-chelation ability of coffee melanoidins. Legend of Figure 3: FeSO4 (50

mg/l) was incubated with food melanoidins under gastric condition. Titrations curve was created by

plotting the mg of chelated Fe2+ versus the concentration of coffee melanoidins. Symbols used are:

(■) free iron and ( ) chelated iron. Data are presented as mean ± SD for three parallels for each

prepared sample. Adapted with permission from Tagliazucchi et al. (2010) J Agric Food Chem 58,

2513–2519. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.

Title of Figure 4: Heme-binding ability of coffee melanoidins. Legend of Figure 4: Heme (10 µM)

was incubated with food melanoidins under gastric condition. Titrations curve was created by



                                                                                                     25
plotting ΔAbs at 405 nm versus the concentration of coffee melanoidins. Data are presented as

mean ± SD for three parallels for each prepared sample.

Title of Figure 5. Simplified scheme showing the mechanism of Fe2+- and heme-initiated

peroxidation and the proposed mechanisms for the antioxidant activity of food melanoidins.

Legend of Figure 5: Coffee melanoidins may act at different levels. In the first step of the reaction

(A) they may sequestrate Fe2+ ions and HmFeIII preventing the formation of alkoxyl radical and of

the protonated ferryl species (HmFe4+-OH) of heme. Coffee melanoidins may also act as radical

scavenger (B) by donating hydrogen atom to the lipid peroxyl radicals (Hm, may represent the free

heme moiety or the heme-containing peptides/proteins such as metmyoglobin). Reprinted with

permission from Tagliazucchi et al. (2010) J Agric Food Chem 58, 2513–2519. Copyright 2010

American Chemical Society.




                                                                                                   26
Table 1. Summary of the studies focused on anti-peroxidative activity of coffee melanoidins.

              Coffee melanoidins
                                                     Model system                            Findings                Ref.
               isolation method

 In vitro
                                                                                         The ability of coffee
                 Gel filtration                                                     melanoidins to prevent lipid
            chromatography (1.2-4.7         Linoeic acid in acqueous media           peroxidation in LH system        34
                    KDa)                                                              increased as the roasting
                                                                                          severity increased
                                                                                       The anti-peroxyl radical
                                                                                   activity of coffee melanoidins
                                                                                       is mainly due to the low
            Ultrafiltration (10 KDa)        Linoeic acid in acqueous media                                            27
                                                                                   molecular weight compounds
                                                                                        ionically bound to the
                                                                                        polymeric melanoidins
                                                                                   Coffee melanoidins may act as
                                                                                    chain-breaking antioxidants,
                                                                                  transferring a hydrogen atom to
            Ultrafiltration (10 KDa)        Linoeic acid in acqueous media                                            40
                                                                                       the free radical LOO· to
                                                                                  produce the stable LOOH and a
                                                                                      stable melanoidin radical
                                                                                        The most active coffee
                                                                                   melanoidins were found to be
               Dialysis (3.5 KDa)
                                                 Rat liver microsome              the medium and, especially, the     41
            followed by gel filtration
                                                                                       lower molecular weight
                                                                                              melanoidins
                                                                                   The inhibition of peroxidation
            Ultrafiltration (10 KDa)             Rat liver microsome               decreased from light- to dark-     33
                                                                                             roasted coffee
                                                                                  Coffee melanoidins completely
                                                                                   abolish the formation of TBA-
            Ultrafiltration (10 KDa)        Human hepatoma HepG2 cells                                                42
                                                                                     RS in the cells already at a
                                                                                    concentration of 0.5 μg/mL.
                                                                                    Coffee melanoidins resulted
              Comparison between
                                                     Human LDL                        more effective than other       43
            roasted and green coffee
                                                                                     thermally processed food.
                                                                                   100% inhibition of LOOH and
                                         Simulated gastric digestion of turkey
            Ultrafiltration (10 KDa)                                                     TBARS formation at           21
                                                         meat
                                                                                     concentration of 3 mg/mL
 In vivo
                                                                                      MRP-rich diet led to a
                                         Human intervention trial (assessing ex       statistically significant
                      None               vivo LDL oxidation after a MRPs rich       protection of isolated LDL        43
                                                        diet)                         against copper-induced
                                                                                         oxidation ex vivo
                                                                                   Coffee melanoidins were able
                                                                                      to reduce serum MDA
               Dialysis (14 KDa)               Rats feeding high fat diet                                             44
                                                                                  concentration of 10% respect to
                                                                                           un-treated rats
                                                                                  Consumption of roasted coffee
                                                                                    during a meal of fast-food
                                                Human intervention trial           meat, resulted after 2 and 4 h,
                      None                (quantification of MDA absorption         in the inhibition by 80 and       23
                                           after fast-food meal consumption)           50%, respectively, of
                                                                                    postprandial plasma MDA
                                                                                             absorption.



                                                                                                                       27
Figure 1




           28
Figure 2




           29
Figure 3




           30
Figure 4




           31
Figure 5




           32
