Toxins 2010, 2, 461-493; doi:10.3390/toxins2040461
                                                                                         OPEN ACCESS


                                                                                     toxins
                                                                                    ISSN 2072-6651
                                                                         www.mdpi.com/journal/toxins
Review

Ochratoxin A: General Overview and Actual Molecular Status
André el Khoury 1 and Ali Atoui 2,*
1
    Centre d’analyses et de recherches, Faculté des Sciences, Université Saint-Joseph, Beyrouth,
    Lebanon
2
    Lebanese Atomic Energy Commission-CNRS, P.O. Box 11-8281, Riad El Solh, 1107 2260 Beirut,
    Lebanon

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: a.atoui@cnrs.edu.lb;
  Tel.: 00961 (1) 450 811; Fax: 00961 (1) 450 810.

Received: 24 January 2010; in revised form: 5 March 2010 / Accepted: 8 March 2010 /
Published: 29 March 2010


      Abstract: Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a mycotoxin produced by several species of Aspergillus
      and Penicillium fungi that structurally consists of a para-chlorophenolic group containing a
      dihydroisocoumarin moiety that is amide-linked to L-phenylalanine. OTA is detected
      worldwide in various food and feed sources. Studies show that this molecule can have
      several toxicological effects such as nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic, neurotoxic, teratogenic and
      immunotoxic. A role in the etiology of Balkan endemic nephropathy and its association to
      urinary tract tumors has been also proved. In this review, we will explore the general
      aspect of OTA: physico-chemical properties, toxicological profile, OTA producing fungi,
      contaminated food, regulation, legislation and analytical methods. Due to lack of sufficient
      information related to the molecular background, this paper will discuss in detail the recent
      advances in molecular biology of OTA biosynthesis, based on information and on new data
      about identification and characterization of ochratoxin biosynthetic genes in both
      Penicillium and Aspergillus species. This review will also cover the development of the
      molecular methods for the detection and quantification of OTA producing fungi in
      various foodstuffs.

      Keywords: Ochratoxin A; toxicity; polyketide synthase gene; molecular biology;
      biosynthesis; detection; quantification
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                        462

1. Definition

   Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a mycotoxin produced by secondary metabolism of many filamentous
species belonging to the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium [1–4]. Biosynthetically, it is a pentaketide
derived from the dihydrocoumarins family coupled to β-phenylalanine. Its chemical name is:
L-phenylalanine-N-[(5-chloro-3,4-dihydro-8-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-oxo-1H-2-benzopyrane-7-yl)carbonyl]
-(R)-isocoumarin and its chemical structure is presented in Figure 1.

                             Figure 1. Chemical structure of ochratoxin A.
                                                  OH

                                  O       C                    O        OH            O
                                                       H


                                                       N                                  O
                                                       H
                                                                                                H


                                                                                              CH3
                                                                            Cl


2. Ochratoxin A Derived Metabolites

   Several metabolites related to OTA have been also identified, particularly, ochratoxin B (OTB) the
dechloro analog of OTA, ochratoxin C (OTC) its ethyl ester, the isocoumaric derivative of OTA,
ochratoxin α (Otα), and its dechloro analog, ochratoxin β (OTβ). Figure 2 presents the general
structure common to these different metabolites and Table 1 shows the characteristic composition of
each one. Recently, new OTA derived metabolites have been characterized, which include a
dechlorinated ochratoxin A derivative identified by nono-ESI-IT-MS [5] and a quinone/hydroquinone
metabolite showing toxicological properties [6]. In addition, it is predicted that OTA will form a
benzoquinone electrophile following activation by cytochrome P450 enzymes, and radical species
following activation by enzymes with peroxidase activities [7,8]. These electrophiles react preferentially
with deoxyguanosine (dG) to form benzetheno adducts and C8-dG adducts, respectively [8].

                       Figure 2. General structure of ochratoxin A metabolites.

                                      O                OH           O

                                                           8            1
                                      9           7
                             R1                                                  O2
                                                                                      CH2R5
                                                                             3
                                              6                     4
                                                       5
                                                                                      H

                                                               R3            R4
                                                       R2
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                         463

                 Table 1. Characteristic composition of ochratoxin A derived metabolites.
      Name                            R1                              R2     R3      R4      R5
      Natural ochratoxins
      Ochratoxin A                    Phenylalanine                   Cl     H       H       H
      Ochratoxin B                    Phenylalanine                   H      H       H       H
      Ochratoxin C                    Ethyl-ester, phenylalanine      Cl     H       H       H
      Ochratoxin A Methyl-ester       Methyl-ester, phenylalanine     Cl     H       H       H
      Ochratoxin B Methyl-ester       Methyl-ester, phenylalanine     H      H       H       H
      Ochratoxin B Ethyl-ester        Ethyl-ester, phenylalanine      H      H       H       H
      Ochratoxin α                    OH                              Cl     H       H       H
      Ochratoxin β                    OH                              H      H       H       H
      4-R-Hydroxyochratixn A          Phenylalanine                   Cl     H       OH      H
      4-s-Hydroxyochratoxin A         Phenylalanine                   Cl     OH      H       H
      10-Hydroxyochratoxin A          Phenylalanine                   Cl     H       H       OH
      Tyrosine analog of OTA          Tyrosine                        Cl     H       H       H
      Serine analog of OTA            Serine                          Cl     H       H       H
      Hydroxyproline analog of        Hydroxyproline                  Cl     H       H       H
      OTA
      Lysine analog of OTA            Lysine                          Cl     H       H       H
      Synthetic ochratoxins
      d-Ochratoxin A                  d-phenylalanine           Cl           H       H       H
      Ochratoxin A Ethyl amid         Ethyl amid, phenylalanine Cl           H       H       H
      O-methyl Ochratoxin A           Phenylalanine, OHCH3 on Cl             H       H       H
                                      C-8

3. Physico-Chemicals Properties of Ochratoxin A

    OTA is a weak organic acid with a pKa value of 7.1 [1–3] and a molar mass of 403.8 g.mol-1. With
crystalline structure varying from colorless to white, this molecule posses an intense green fluorescence
under UV light in acid medium and blue fluorescence in alkaline conditions [4].
    In acid and neutral pH, OTA is soluble in polar organic solvents (alcohols, ketones, chloroform),
slightly soluble in water and insoluble in petroleum ethers and saturated hydrocarbons. While in
alkaline conditions, this molecule is soluble in aqueous sodium bicarbonate solution and in all alkaline
solutions in general. It has a melting point of about 90 °C when crystallized from benzene as a solvate.
However, non-solvated crystals of melting point 169 °C have been obtained from xylene, which are
suitable for X-ray structural analysis. OTA is optically active and its spectral characteristics are shown
in Table 2.
    The particularity of OTA is due to its high stability. It has been shown that it possesses a resistance
to acidity and high temperatures. Thus, once foodstuffs are contaminated, it is very difficult to totally
remove this molecule.
    In 1982, Müller [17] showed that the OTA is only partially degraded at a normal conditions of cooking.
Moreover, this molecule can resist three hours of high pressure steam sterilization of 121 °C [18], and
even at 250 °C its destruction is not complete [19].
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                       464

   Gamma irradiation (up to 7,5 Mrad) of OTA in ethanol does not cause any degradation. However,
degradation is observed at low moisture level when OTA has been treated with an excess of sodium
hypochlorite (NaOCl) [20]. Moreover, exposure to fluorescent light is a factor of degradation.

                              Table 2. Spectral characteristics of ochratoxin A.
              Spectral          Solvents       Characteristics               References
                                               λmax = 213nm (ε36.800)
                 UV-VIS            ETOH                                           [9]
                                               λmax = 332nm (ε 6.400)
                                ETOH 96%       λmax = 467nm
               Fluorescence                                                       [9]
                                ETOH /ABS.     λmax = 428nm
                                               3380; 2988; 1723; 1674; 1528;
                      IR           CHCl3       1425; 1381; 1304; 1260; 1170;     [10]
                                                                    -1
                                               1140; 1107; 827 cm
                                               δ 12,70; δ 10,80; δ 8,55
                                               (3H); δ 7,23; δ 7,15
              NMR 1H250-
                                   CDCl3       (H Aromatic); δ 4,71; δ 5,07    [11–14]
                MHZ
                                               (CH); δ 2,78; δ 3,2 (CH2); δ
                                               1,55 (CH3)
                                               m/z 239/241
                   MS                —         m/z 255/257                     [15,16]
                                               molecular ion m/z 403

4. Toxicological Profile

   The toxicological status of OTA has been examined many times and was the subject of a complete
monograph by the IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) in 1993 [21].
   Following the discovery of human and animal spontaneous nephropathies, many experimental
studies were carried out in order to show the implication of OTA in these diseases [22–28]. These
studies showed that this molecule can have several effects such as nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic,
neurotoxic, teratogenic and immunotoxic on several species of animals, and can cause kidney and liver
tumors in mice and rats, however its toxicity varies depending on the sex, the species and the cellular
type of the tested animals [29]. The genotoxic status of OTA is still controversial, due to contradictory
results obtained in various microbial and mammalian tests. However, evidence of DNA-adducts
formation was shown following chronic exposure of OTA to rat and sub-acute exposure to pig [30].

4.1. Nephrotoxicity

   Nephropathy is the major toxic effect of OTA. This molecule shows to be potentially nephrotoxic in
all non-ruminant mammals [31]. Epidemiological studies carried out in Denmark, Hungary,
Scandinavia and Poland, showed that OTA plays an important role in the etiology of porcine
nephropathy [32]. This mycotoxin was also associated with human nephropathy [33–35] and it is
suspected to be the cause of the human fatal disease known as Balkan Endemic Nephropathy (BEN),
an interstitial chronic disease affecting the south-eastern population of Europe (Croatia, Bosnia,
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     465

Bulgaria and Romania) [26,33–36]. It is also considered to be the major cause of the Tunisian
Nephropathy (TCIN) [37] affecting the population in Tunisia.

4.2. Neurotoxicity

   It has been shown that the administration of OTA at gestation period in rats induced many
malformations in the central nervous system [38]. In the same way, Soleas et al. [39] reported that
OTA can be regarded as a possible cause of certain lesions as well as damage at the cerebral level.
Thus, this substance seems to be highly toxic for the nervous cells and able to reach at any time the
neural tissue (brain, retina) [40].

4.3. Teratogenicity

    OTA is a potent teratogen to laboratory animals. It can cross the placenta and accumulate in fetal
tissue causing various morphological anomalies. It has been reported to elicit prenatal
dysmorphogenesis in rats [41–44], mice [45], hamsters [46] and chick embryos [47]. The mechanism
of OTA induced teratogenesis has not been clearly defined and may involve an indirect effect through
maternal action [48] and/or a direct effect on the developing conceptus [49]. Thus, the gravity of
malformations depends on the route of administration and the gestative period.

4.4. Immunotoxicity

    Under certain conditions, OTA presents a powerful immunosuppressor effect, which is observed at
low or high doses [50].
    Necroses of lymphoid tissues were reported indicating there high sensitivity to the OTA [50],
humoral and cellular immunity affections were also described [51].
    OTA seems to play a role in the inhibition of the peripherals T and B lymphocytes proliferation and
stops the production of interleukin 2 (IL2) and its receptors [52]. Moreover, it blocks the activity of
killer cells as well as the production of interferon [38].
    The administration of OTA to many animal species causes variable effects on the osseous marrow
and immunity response. Thus, this molecule is considered to be the origin of:

   - Lymphopenia,
   - Regression of the thymus,
   - Suppression of the immunity response.
   Following these results, OTA is clearly taken as an important immunosupressor agent [49].

4.5. Carcinogenesis

   OTA is reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen based on sufficient evidence of
carcinogenicity in experimental animals. When this molecule was administered in the diet,
hepatocellular tumors (designated as well-differentiated trabecular adenomas), renal cell tumors (renal
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     466

cystadenomas and solid renal-cell tumors), hepatomas (some exhibiting the trabecular structure), and
hyperplastic hepatic nodules were observed in male mice [53].
   In another study, administration of OTA in the diet induced hepatocellular carcinomas and
adenomas in female mice [54]. Gavage administration of OTA to male and female rats resulted in a
dose-related increase in the incidence of renal-cell adenomas and adenocarcinomas; further, metastasis
of the renal-cell tumors was also observed in male and female rats. When administered by gavage,
OTA increased the incidence and multiplicity of fibroadenomas of the mammary gland in female
rats [21,55].
   However, no adequate human studies of the relationship between exposure to OTA and human
cancer have been reported. Incidence of and mortality from urothelial urinary tract tumors have been
correlated with the geographical distribution of Balkan endemic nephropathy in Bulgaria and
Yugoslavia [56].

5. Ochratoxin A Producing Fungi

   OTA was isolated in 1965 from a culture of Aspergillus ochraceus (section Circumdati ) [57], but
subsequent studies have revealed that a variety of fungal species included in the genera Aspergillus
and Penicillium are able to produce ochratoxins [57]. A. ochraceus has been shown to consist of two
species [58,59]. The second and new species producing large amounts of OTA consistently has been
described as A. westerdijkiae. In Aspergillus section Nigri Aspergillus carbonarius [60] is a major
OTA producer. It occurs in grapes, producing OTA in grape products, including grape juice, wines and
dried vine fruits [61,62] and sometimes in coffee beans [63,64]. Aspergillus niger aggregates have
been reported as OTA producers [64–67]. The reported percentage of ochratoxigenic isolates
belonging to the A. niger aggregate is much lower than A. carbonarius species [68]. A. lacticoffeatus
and A. sclerotioniger are reported to produce OTA [69].
   Others Aspergilli can produce OTA in large amounts, but they appear to be relatively rare. In
Aspergillus section Circumdati (formerly the Aspergillus ochraceus group), the following species can
produce OTA: Aspergillus cretensis, A. flocculosus, A. pseudoelegans, A. roseoglobulosus,
A. sclerotiorum, A. sulphureus and Neopetromyces muricatus [59]. According to Ciegler [70] and
Hesseltine, et al. [71] A. melleus, A. ostianus, A. persii and A. petrakii may produce trace amounts of
OTA, but this has not been confirmed since publication of those papers. Strains of these species
reported to produce large amounts of OTA were re-identified by Frisvad et al. [72]. In Aspergillus
section Flavi, Petromyces albertensis produces OTA.
   In the genus Penicillium, P. verrucosum has been regarded to be the only species of the genus
Penicillium to synthesize OTA [73]. However, it has been shown that two species of the genus
Penicillium have this capacity, namely P. verrucosum and P. nordicum. Penicillium verrucosum is the
major producer of OTA in stored cereals [73–75]. Penicillium nordicum [76] is the main OTA
producer found in meat products such as salami and ham.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                         467

6. Contaminated Foods

   Cereals are the most important source of human food. The annual world crop of cereals exceeds
2,000 million tones, meaning over 160 kg per inhabitant, and the production of cereals is still
growing [77–79]. However, an investigation carried out by Pittet [80] on a worldwide scale showed
that 25% to 40% of cereals are contaminated by mycotoxins. This contamination can occur in several
times (in the field and/or during storage).
   It is especially in the countries with hot and wet climatic conditions (in particular African countries,
South Asia and South America) that the growth of toxigenic filamentous fungi is most favored. Thus,
rice, corn, and millet: the basic foods of the populations of these countries, are often contaminated
especially by aflatoxins and ochratoxins [81]. However, countries of Northern Europe, characterized
by a low temperature climate, are especially contaminated by OTA where its production is due to a
different species belonging to the Penicillium genera (P.verrucosum, P.nordicum). These are species
able to grow and to produce OTA at low temperatures, which can explain the fact that these countries
are more contaminated with OTA producing Penicillium species than Aspergillus ones.
   Thus, worldwide, cereals are considered as being the major source of OTA contamination, where
50% of human daily intake of this mycotoxin is due to the consumption of different cereals derived
products [82].
   Moreover, wine was recently considered as being the second source of OTA human consumption
(10% to 15% of the total OTA daily intake) [83–86]. Many recent works [22,26,34,83,87–90]
highlight the presence of considerable levels of this toxin in wines, musts and grape juices (up to 7 μg
per liter). This occurrence of OTA in grape derived products was explained by the fact that grapes
were contaminated in the vineyard from veraison onward, and sometimes even as soon as setting, by
various ochratoxigenic species especially belonging to the genus Aspergillus section Nigri
(A.carbonarius and A.niger aggregates) and that OTA production increases rapidly with maturation
stages [24,34,84,89,90]. Thus, the date of grape harvest would have an important effect on the OTA
content in grape and its derived products.
   Moreover, OTA contamination of many other raw agricultural products has been well documented;
such contamination occurs in a variety of food and feed, such as coffee beans, pulses, spices, meat and
cheese products [91]. OTA has also been detected in other beverages such as beer.

7. Regulation and Legislation

   In recent years, the general concern about the potential effects of mycotoxins on the health of
humans and animals has been increasing. Measures have been set up by authorities in many countries
to monitor and control mycotoxin levels. Various factors play a role in decision-making processes
focused on setting limits for mycotoxins.
   These include scientific factors to assess risk (such as the availability of toxicological data), food
consumption data, knowledge about the level and distribution of mycotoxins in commodities, and
analytical methodology. Economic factors, such as commercial, trade interests and food security
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                       468

issues, also have an impact. Weighing the various factors that play a role in the decision making
process to establish mycotoxin tolerances is therefore of crucial importance. Despite the difficulties,
mycotoxin regulations have been established in many countries during the past decades [92] and newer
regulations are still being issued.
   Maximum tolerable levels and guideline levels have been established in different food and feed
products, often down to the ppb or ppt level [93–98]. Such regulation has been fixed for a number of
mycotoxins like aflatoxins; the trichothecenes deoxynivalenol, diacetoxyscirpenol, T-2 toxin and HT-2
toxin; the fumonisins B1, B2 and B3; agaric acid; the ergot alkaloids; ochratoxin A; patulin,
phomopsins; sterigmatocystin and zearalenone [99]. Respective levels are under debate for
other mycotoxins.
   OTA was evaluated by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) in
1991 [100] and a provisional tolerable weekly intake (PTWI) of 112 ng/kg body weight (b.w.) was
established. This value was proposed according to the porcine nephropathies data basis.
   However, this molecule was re-evaluated by the JECFA in 1995 [101] and the PTWI was
reconfirmed, rounding it to 100 ng/kg b.w. per week, and the request for further studies on OTA
was re-iterated.
   Since its last evaluation and after the availability of several new studies on OTA effects, the JECFA
recommended at its 56th meeting in February 2001 [102] that studies should be conducted to clarify
the mechanism by which OTA induces nephrotoxicity and carcinogenicity and noted that studies to
resolve these issues are in progress. JECFA retained the previously established PTWI of 100 ng/kg
b.w. per week, pending the results of these studies.
   On the other hand, the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) expressed its opinion on OTA on
17 September 1998 that in [103]. It stated that in the light of more recent toxicological studies and
exposure data, specific attention has also been given to vulnerable groups such as infants and children
and groups of consumers who are exposed to higher levels of OTA than the average consumer due to
their dietary habits.
   This committee proposed to reduce the OTA intake as much as possible to levels between
1.2–14 ng/kg b.w. per day.
   The European Commission Regulation (EC) No. 472/2002 of 12 March 2002 [104] amended the
Regulation (EC) No. 466/2001 [105] setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs.
This regulation limits OTA contamination in unprocessed cereals, including rice and buckwheat, up to
5μg/kg. However, concerning cereal derived products, OTA contamination was fixed to 3 μg/kg. This
regulation fixes also the contamination of dry grapes to a limit of 10 μg/kg.
   Moreover, the regulation (EC) No. 683/2004 of April 13 2004 [97] amended the regulation (EC)
No. 466/2001 [105] including a directive limiting the OTA contamination to 0.5 μg/kg in all food
preparations for babies and in diet foods for special medical purposes intended specifically for infants.
   Added to that, the regulation (EC) No. 123/2005 [106] highlights the contribution of many food
products such as wine, grape juices and coffee in human OTA exposure. This regulation did not
modify the maximum contents established previously on cereals or grapes. However, it includes a new
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                      469

directive limiting OTA contamination in grape juices, wines (red, white and rosé), and must to 2 μg/L.
Another new directive aiming to set limits for OTA contamination in coffee was taken; this one fixed a
maximum level for OTA of up to 5 μg/kg in torrefied coffee beans and to 10 μg/kg in instant coffee.
   According to the regulation (EC) No. 466/2001 [105], it is totally prohibited to mix non-conform
products with conform ones in order to reduce OTA contamination levels. There was also an
interdiction to use chemical treatments for OTA decontamination in products for human consumption.
   In all cases, the aim of these directives is to estimate and to minimize the presence of OTA in
various foods by implementating many plans having the objective to reduce the contamination of food
products by this mycotoxin. Various strategies can be adopted in order to obtain products in agreement
with the international regulations. It will be a question of observing good agricultural practices, or
decontaminating the end product.

8. Analytical Analysis of OTA

8.1. Chromatographical methods

   The analysis of OTA in most foodstuffs is relatively straightforward and generally reliable results
are obtained, as evidenced by the results from proficiency testing. Samples need to be acid- or alkali-
extracted from the foodstuffs, with alkaline extraction from most matrices showing generally better
recoveries [107].

8.1.1. Thin layer chromatography (TLC)

   TLC is featured in earlier AOAC methods [108,109], which use a silica gel adsorbent and an acidic
solvent system. Since then, this method has been very commonly used in many laboratories around the
world for identifying and quantifying the OTA in foodstuffs. The TLC consists of an OTA visual
detection by its greenish fluorescence under long wave ultraviolet light, which changes to blue
fluorescence after spraying the chromatographical plate with methanolic sodium bicarbonate solution
or exposing it to ammonia fumes; scanning densitometric analysis may also be carried out. However,
the detection limit makes this method inadequate for present day monitoring and compliance purposes.

8.1.2. Liquid chromatography (LC)

   Conventionally liquid/liquid extraction and solid phase clean-up have been used prior to HPLC
determination with fluorescence detection [110]. However, over the past 10 years, most laboratories
have tended to move towards using immuno-affinity column clean-up because they considered it is
relatively simple to carry-out and provides sample extracts generally free of interferences.
   Good methods are available for dried fruit [111], beer [112,113], coffee [114,115], dried figs [107],
milk [116] and wine [22,113]. Roasted coffee tends to be the most problematic of foodstuffs to analyze
for OTA and in some methods an additional clean-up step is advocated prior to the affinity column
stage [117].
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                    470

   Similar methodology has been used successfully to analyze blood and urine for OTA, when this
biomarker approach has been employed for exposure assessment [118]. There are CEN standards for
determining OTA in cereals, roasted coffee, wine and beer with limits of quantification (LOQ) ranging
from 1.3 ng/g for barley [119] and coffee [120] to 5 pg/mL for wine [22].
   Particular attention was paid to validating a method for OTA in baby food at an LOD and LOQ of
0.05 ng/g and 0.22 ng/g respectively, the additional sensitivity being obtained by extracting larger
sample sizes and enhancing fluorescence detection by using post-column ammoniation [121]. Whereas
affinity column clean-up for confirmation of results is not essential, verification of results can be
undertaken by methylation of OTA followed by the observation of the shift in retention time, or by
LC/MS [107].

8.2. Immunological methods

  The use of ELISA (Enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay) for OTA analysis is considered as an
important and very rapid method, because it is easy to use and due to the large number of samples that
can be processed at the same time (up to 90 samples for each ELISA kit in 45 minutes), and because
this method do not require any clean-up procedure. ELISA methods have been applied to quantify
OTA in cereals, food, feed, animals tissues and serum [122,123]. However, an important consideration
with ELISA should be taken: the specificity of the antibody. Cross reactivity with related molecules
can vary widely given over-estimated values.
   Radio-immunoassay (RIA) for OTA has been applied to surveys of cereals, cereal products,
feedstuffs, pig serum and tissues [124–126]. OTA has been also determined by an enzyme
immunosensor with an oxygen electrode [127]. However, these methods do not appear to have been
used recently.

9. Current Status on the Biosynthesis of Ochratoxin A

   Although much information exists concerning the various toxigenic properties of OTA, unlike other
important mycotoxins, not very much is known about the OTA biosynthetic pathway in any fungal
species. It is widely believed that the isocoumarin group is a pentaketide formed from acetate and
malonate via a polyketide synthesis pathway [128–130]. Thus, a polyketide synthase (PKS), which is
considered as key enzyme, is involved in the OTA biosynthesis in a similar way of other polyketide
mycotoxins such as fumonisins [131] and aflatoxins [132,133].
   Huff and Hamilton, [134] proposed a biosynthetic pathway based on a mechanistical model
according to the structure of OTA (Figure 3). The heterocyclic portion of OTA is structurally similar
to mellein, a secondary metabolite produced by many OTA producing species such as A. ochraceus,
A. westerdijkiae and A. melleus. Mellein is also produced by non ochratoxigenic species such as
Pezicula spp. [135], Botryosphaeria obtusa [136], Septoria nodorum [137], Phoma tracheiphila [138],
Apiospora camptospora [139], Cercospora taiwanensis [140], C. scirpicola [141], Fusarium larvarum
[142], Gyrostroma missouriense [139], Pezicula livida, Cryptosporiopsis malicorticis,
Cryptosporiopsis sp. and Plectophomella sp. [143].
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                                                                        471

       Figure 3. Schematic representation of the hypothetical OTA biosynthetic pathway as
       proposed by Huff and Hamilton, [134].

                                                                                     Acetyl CoA + Malonate
                                                     Polyketide synthase
                                                                                          Polyketide


                                                                                          OH         O

           COOH
                                                                                                             O


                                                                                                                     H

                                                                                                                     CH3             Mellein
  HO              OH

                       Shikimik acid
           OH                                                                  O          OH         O


                                                                      HO
                                                                                                             O

                                                                                                                         H

                                                                                                                         CH3           Ochratoxin β
                          COOH


                          NH2

                                                                               O           OH            O


                                                                      HO
                                                                                                                 O

                       Esterification                                                                                      H            Ochratoxin α
                                                                                                                         CH3


                                                                                           Cl



                                O
                                                                                     O          OH               O
                                                                      O

                                    O         CH3      +        -O    P        O
                                                                                                                         O
                          NH2                                         O   -                                                     H

                                                                                                                               CH3

                                        Peptide synthase                                        Cl




                                                            O                 CH3
                                                 O
                                                                                     OH         O

                                                       CH        NH
                                                                                                         O

                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                             Ochratoxin A ethylester
                                                                                                                 CH3


                                             Esterase                                Cl




                                                            O
                                              HO
                                                                                    OH          O


                                                      CH        NH
                                                                                                     O

                                                                                                             H

                                                                                                             CH3
                                                                                                                                     Ochratoxin A

                                                                                    Cl
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                       472

   According to Huff and Hamilton, [134], three distinct steps occur in OTA biosynthesis (Figure 3):
The first part is polyketide synthesis of ochratoxin α via mellein involving a polyketide synthase. The
second step includes acyl activation: mellein is methylated and oxidized to 7-Carboxy-Mellein (=OTβ).
Chlorination by a chloroperoxidase leads to OTα. This component is then transformed to a mixed
anhydride, an activation reaction using ATP. The second precursor phenylalanine is synthesized via
the shikimic acid pathway, followed by ethyl ester activation so that it can participate in the
subsequent acyl displacement reaction. In the third step, linkage of those activated precursors via a
synthetase takes place, generating OTC, an ethyl ester of OTA: de-esterification by an esterase or
transesterification is the last step in this postulated biosynthetic pathway (Figure 3).
   This schematic pathway has been dissented by Harris and Mantle [144] using labeled precursors to
the growing cultures of OTA producing fungi A. ochraceus. Relative incorporation of labeled putative
intermediates ochtatoxin α and β and mellein indicated a strong preferential role of α, moderate role of
β, but found no role of mellein into OTA production.
   At the molecular level, the study of genetic nature of polyketide has been facilitated by the
introduction of molecular techniques such as Genomic DNA bank and cDNA bank construction;
polymerase chain reaction (PCR); gene inactivation; differential display reverse transcriptase-PCR
(DDRT-PCR); microarrays etc. PCR and subtractive PCR have been utilized to identify various PKS
genes responsible for the biosynthesis of various polyketides [145–148]. Pairs of degenerated primers
targeting KS domain; which is the most conserved domain among different PKSs, have been
previously designed to amplify KS domain fragment from different types of PKS genes [145–147].
These degenerated primers were successfully used in OTA producing fungi. Five different PKS genes
have been identified in A. ochraceus by Varga et al. [149] and Edwards et al. [129]. In addition nine
different KS domains in A. westerdijkiae NRRL 3174 (=A. ochraceus) as well as five different KS
domain sequences in A. carbonarius (2Mu134 = CBS 120167) [150] have been isolated.
   In an attempt to elucidate the molecular biosynthetic pathway of OTA, O’Callaghan et al. [148]
have previously cloned part of the polyketide synthase (pks) gene (GeneBank accession number:
AY272043) required for OTA biosynthesis in A. ochraceus, but no information was obtained
concerning the presence or absence of some metabolite like the mellein. Later on, a polyketide
synthase gene otapksPN (GeneBank accession number: AY196315), from P. nordicum that is essential
for OTA biosynthesis was reported by Karolewiez and Geisen, [151]. Recently, Bacha et al. [152]
reported the characterization of a PKS gene, awks1(or aoks1 as named by the authors), (GeneBank
Accession Number: AY583209) required for the OTA biosynthesis in A. westerdijkiae. Disruption of
awks1 stopped the biosynthesis of OTA, but did not affect the biosynthesis of others metabolites
specially the mellein. This finding supports the results of Harris and Mantle, [144] where a mutant in
which the PKS gene has been interrupted cannot synthesize OTA but still produce the mellein.

10. Identification of Ochratoxin A Gene Cluster

   The adaptation of an organism to environmental conditions requires the cooperation of several
genes that contribute to its survival. In a metabolic chain, the product of an enzymatic reaction must be
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                        473

taken very quickly by the following enzyme to ensure a correct speed of formation of the final product
and avoid being destroyed by the possible reactions. So an enzymatic assembly in the form of complex
or enzymatic cluster [153,154] is therefore a necessity. In fungi, several clusters coding for polyketides
have been studied. These clusters include clusters for the biosynthesis of mycotoxins (aflatoxins,
fumonisins, ergot alkaloid, paxillin), antibiotics (cephalosporin and penicillin), melanins and some
pharmaceutical products (lovastatin and compactin).
   In the following paragraphs we will discuss the achievement made for the identification of OTA
gene cluster in Aspergillus and Penicillium species.

10.1. Aspergillus species

    Given that mycotoxin biosynthetic genes are often coordinately regulated [153,154] and arranged in
clusters [155,157], and having established that OTA production in permissive and restrictive medium
appears to be dependent on pks gene transcript levels expression, O’Callaghan et al. [158] attempted to
identify other putative OTA biosynthetic genes in A. ochraceus by comparing their expression profiles
with that of the OTA pks gene in permissive and restrictive medium. In their study, they focused on
two putative cytochrome P450 monooxygenase genes. Both genes displayed a high degree of
similarity to other monooxygenase genes encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of polyketide
secondary metabolites. Specifically, the p450-H11 gene is very similar to the averantin oxidoreductase
gene involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis [159], while the p450-B03 gene is not only similar to the
trichodiene oxygenase gene from the trichothecene biosynthetic pathway in Gibberella zeae [160] but
also displays significant similarity to the cypA gene in the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway from
A. flavus [161]. A strong correlation between the amount of pks and cytochrome P450 transcripts
present and the amount of OTA accumulation was observed by the authors indicating a possible role
for these genes in OTA biosynthesis. Additionally, O’Callaghan et al. [158] reported on the cloning of
the full length pks gene and on the cloning part of a novel nonribosomal peptide synthetase (nrps) gene
900 bp upstream of the pks gene. Both the pks and nrps genes appear to be transcribed in the same
direction but they are not in the same reading frame. Thus they appear to encode two separate proteins
rather than a single hybrid type PKS-NRPS.
    Alignment study (Figure 4) revealed that the pks gene characterized by O’Callaghan et al. [148]
shares more than 98% identity with a PKS gene awlc35-12 (or aolc35-12), identified in
A. westerdijkiae [150,162]. This finding shows that A. ochraceus and A. westerdijkiae contain a similar
gene. The pks gene also displayed similarities of 60% to a hypothetical PKS gene corresponding to the
OTA cluster in A. niger [163] and only 38% to a awks1 gene required for the biosynthesis OTA in
A. westerdijkiae [152] (Figure 4). Based on the high degree of similarities between the awlc35-12 and
pks genes, Bacha et al. [152] assumed that awlc35-12 could be involved in OTA biosynthesis in
A. westerdijkiae. Given that awks1 is different from pks, they concluded that two PKS may be
involved in the biosynthesis of OTA in A. westerdijkiae. To date, only four cases have been reported that
involve two different fungal PKSs essential for a single polyketide: a set of two unusual type I
multifunctional PKSs for the biosyntheses of lovastatin and compactin in A. terreus and P. citrinum,
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                474

respectively, [164–166] and two PKS have been reported to be involved in the biosynthesis of
zearaleone in G. zea [167] and T toxin in C. heterosphorus [168].

     Figure 4. Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequence of ochratoxin A polyketide
     synthase gene: awks1 (A. westerdijkiae, Accession Number: AY583209), otapksPN
     (P. nordicum, Accession No.: AY557343), awlc35-12 (A. westerdijkiae, Accession No.:
     AY583208), pks (A. ochraceus, Accession No.: AY272043) and PKS- A. niger (hypothetical
     PKS gene corresponding to OTA cluster in A. niger, Accession No.: An15g07920).
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                      475

   In A. carbonarius, a cDNA-AFLP differential technique was performed by Botton et al. [169] in
two strains of A. carbonarius, antagonists to the ability of producing OTA, allowing the identification
of 119 differentially expressed sequences putatively involved in the regulation of OTA biosynthesis.
The differential conditions were achieved by growth on different minimal media, either supporting or
inhibiting OTA production. A connection was pointed out between the biosynthesis of the toxin,
vegetative growth and sexual/asexual developmental progression. A putative model for OTA
biosynthesis regulation has been elaborated by the authors [169].

10.2. Penicillium species

    Recently, most of the gene cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of OTA in Penicillium has been
characterized. A 10 kb genomic DNA fragment of P. nordicum has been cloned [73,151,170,171],
which carries three long open reading frames. One open reading frame (otapksPN) is a polyketide
synthase, which is different from PKS genes found in Aspergillus species (Figure 4). The second open
reading frame (npsPN, GeneBank accession number AY534879) has homology to non-ribosomal
peptide synthetases, and the third open reading frame (aspPN) has homology to fungal alkaline serine
proteinases. In a systematic analysis, the influence of the most important growth parameters including
temperature, water activity and pH were analyzed by Real Time PCR and microarrays. Interestingly
,all analyzed external parameters resulted in a similar expression profile of the OTA biosynthesis
genes. Interestingly the otapksPN gene is present only in P. nordicum but not in
P. verrucosum, indicating genetic differences exist also between both OTA producing Penicillium
species [73,170,171].

11. Detection of Ochratoxigenic Species by PCR

   Early and rapid detection of potential OTA producing fungi is important to reduce the negative
impacts of OTA. Usual identification and quantification methods of food-borne fungi require multiple
steps. Morphological and physiological tests were time-consuming and often, mycological expertise
was necessary [170,172]. The PCR [173] has replaced laborious and time consuming microbiological
analysis by amplification of specific genomic markers rather than growing the living organism under
study. Within the last 10 years PCR systems have been developed for the detection and differentiation
of major species and groups of mycotoxigenic fungi. One of the most important factors in the set up of
such method is the reliability of the primer set designed and the targeted DNA sequence of interest
organism [173]. Recently, various pairs of PCR primers were developed to set up novel diagnostic
approaches for OTA producers in the Aspergillus and Penicillium genera.

11.1. AFLP, RFLP, RAPD markers primers based

   Pelegrinelli-Fungaro et al. [174] described the development of a primer pair with high specificity to
A. carbonarius, the main OTA producer in grapes. In their study, 29 strains of A. carbonarius, 16 A.
tubingensis strains and 29 strains of A. niger were subjected to random-amplified-polymorphic DNA
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                       476

(or RAPD) analysis using 471 random oligonucleotides. One particular fragment of 809 bp
differentiated A. carbonarius from the other species. SCAR primers designed from this fragment
sequence enabling differentiation of A. carbonarius strains from other Aspergillus spp by PCR.
However, primers could not distinguish between toxigenic and non-toxigenic isolates of
A. carbonarius.
   Amplified fragment length polymorphism (or AFLP) marker-based primers for A. ochraceus and
A. carbonarius have also been applied [175–178]. AFLP revealed high similarity of banding patterns
between the A. ochraceus strains [175] and also between strains of A. carbonarius [177]. However,
both OTA producers and non-producers were scattered randomly in both species analysed. These
findings were in strict contrast with results obtained by Castella et al. [179]. In their study,
Castella et al. [179] classified 66 strains of P. verrucosum in two distinct genotypes based on AFLP
and RFLP analysis. The two RAPD as well as the two AFLP groups were completely coincidental.
Strains in the two groups differed in their ability to produce OTA, with group I containing mainly high
producing strains, and group II containing moderate to non-producing strains.

11.2. Gene-based approaches for the diagnosis of ochratoxigenic fungi

   Several genes such as rRNA, β-tubulin, elongation factor 1 α and the calmodulin genes provide
highly conserved as well as variable sequence regions. Based on the alignment of a partial sequence of
calmodulin genes from representative strains of A. niger group, A. carbonarius, A. japonicus and
A. aculeatus, Perrone et al. [180] detected a high degree of homology between strains assigned to
A. carbonarius (99.98%) and also between strains of A. japonicus and A. aculeatus (99.40%). Based
on variable regions, the authors found three different regions suitable for designing species-specific
PCR primers. The assay was useful in screening vast numbers of isolates of black aspergilli from
grapes in order to evaluate the toxigenic potential connected with this commodity. Recently,
Susca et al. [181] developed species-specific primers based on partial calmodulin gene sequences to
identify A. carbonarius and A. niger by PCR. Moreover, a primer pair targeting the conserved regions
of the A. carbonarius calmodulin gene has also been developed by Mulè et al. [182], allowing only the
amplification of A. carbonarius strains.
   Morello et al. [183] found genetic variation between the β-tubulin gene sequences from
A. ochraceus and A. westerdijkiae allowed to design a primer-pair specific to A. westerdijkiae. Using
these primers, no PCR product from DNA of A. ochraceus was obtained while all isolates of
A. westerdijkiae gave positive results.
   The coding portions of many fungal 18S, 5.8S and 28S rDNA genes are highly conserved and
primers to these regions have been generated [184]. The internal transcribed spacer sequences (ITS-1
and ITS-2) and IGS [185] contains hypervariable regions leading to most of the intraspecies sequence
diversity [186–189]. The ITS region is amplified from the target fungus and sequenced to identify
regions of DNA unique to the fungus of interest. Polymorphism within the ITS region is generally (but
not always) at the level of species, rather than between isolates of the same species, making it an ideal
target for the development of species-specific PCR assays. For example the species-specific primers
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                      477

have been designed on the basis of ITS sequence to discriminate the main species included in section
Nigri: A. japonicus, A. heteromorphus, A. ellipticus and the two morphologically indistinguishable
species of the A. niger aggregate: A. niger and A. tubingensis [190]. Other species-specific PCR-based
assays to ochratoxigenic species were developed for A. carbonarius and A. ochraceus based on
ITS [191].
   Restriction digestion analysis of the ITS products was tested to assess its effectiveness as a rapid
method to identify different isolates of black Aspergillus species from grapes [185].
   Among the PCR based approaches, Accensi et al. [192] used a PCR-RFLP technique to distinguish
A. niger and A. tubingensis isolates. The authors used the restriction enzyme RsaI to digest the
amplified ITS region of the isolates, and observed that isolates of the A. niger species complex exhibit
two different RFLP patterns, N and T corresponding to A. niger and A. tubingensis isolates,
respectively. Other restriction enzymes has also been used for species identification recently using
PCR-RFLP analysis of the ITS region [185]. The authors used HhaI, NlaIII and RsaI to distinguish
between A. niger, A. tubingensis, A. carbonarius and A. aculeatus isolates came from grapes. Zanzotto
et al. [193] used PCR-RFLP analysis of the ITS, IGS and β-tubulin genes to distinguish between
OTA-producing and non-producing isolates of the A. niger aggregate.

11.3. Using mycotoxin biosynthetic gene for identifying of ochratoxigenic fungi

   In some instances, species specific detection is not always of primary objective. It may be more
relevant to determine whether the producers of particular mycotoxins are present rather than to identify
exactly what the species are. This is particularly important where a mycotoxin can be produced by a
number of species. Many mycotoxin biosynthetic genes are present within gene clusters, and some of
these appear to have undergone horizontal transfer from one species to another and are now present in
several species [153,194]. Regions of homology within mycotoxin biosynthetic gene from the different
species can be used to develop primers to detect the presence of the relevant mycotoxigenic species.
This strategy was successfully applied for aflatoxin producers [195,196], trichothecene-producing
fungi [197–199], fumonisin-producing Fusarium species [198–200] and also for producers of
patulin [198,201].
   In A. ochraceus, the sequence of AoLC35-12 (accession nb:AY583208) was found to join a
sequence encoding for acyl transferase domain of a polyketide synthase [150,162], which is involved
in the OTA biosynthesis pathway [142]. Dao et al. [162] designed two sets of specific primers,
AoLC35-12L/AoLC35-12R and AoOTAL/AoOTAR, from AoLC35-12. The set primers
AoOTAL/AoOTAR specifically detected A. ochraceus by PCR method. Because A. ochraceus and
A. westerdijkiae were only recently dismembered into two species, the primer-pairs designed until now
are not specific either to A. ochraceus or to A. westerdijkiae, i.e., they recognize both species. The
second primer pair AoLC35-12L/AoLC35-12R was found to detect OTA producing fungi
A. carbonarius, A. melleus, A. ochraceus, A. sulfureus, P. verrucosum and citrinin producing
P. citrinum and Monascus ruber.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                    478

   In A. carbonarius, five different KS domain sequences (AcKS9, AcKS10, Ac12RL3, AcLC35-4
and AcLC35-6) were identified by Atoui et al. [150]. Two different PCR species specific detection
systems were developed based on primers designed from AcKS10 [202] and Ac12RL3 [203] proved to
be highly specific, yielding amplification only in A. carbonarius strains, the main OTA producer
in grapes.
   In the genus Penicillium, a PCR method for differentiation and detection of two ochratoxingenic
Penicillium species, P. nordicum and P. verrucosum, has been developed. It is based upon two genes
of the OTA biosynthetic pathway, namely the OTA polyketide synthase gene (otapksPN) and a non-
ribosomal peptide syntethase gene (otanpsPN) from P. nordicum [73,170]. P. verrucosum gives
consistently only a positive reaction with the primers for the otanpsPN gene, whereas P. nordicum is
positive for both genes. The PCR reaction is negative with all of other food related fungal species
tested. This system has been used to analyze 62 Penicillium strains isolated from cured meat products
or ripening rooms.

12. Application of PCR for the Detection and Quantification of OTA Producers in Contaminated
Commodities

   Recent advances in DNA-based techniques such as real-time PCR (RT-PCR) are providing new
tools for fungal detection and quantification by detecting and quantifying their DNA. RT-PCR can be
performed using different chemistries, such as SYBR® Green I dye [204,205] and TaqMan® [206].
Both systems have proven useful in monitoring and quantification of OTA fungal producer in many
food commodities [73,170,176,182,202,203].
   One of the major motivations for the development of PCR based detection systems in many
publications is the prospect of using this kind of analysis to estimate OTA concentrations in sample
material. One might therefore anticipate that assays based on OTA biosynthetic genes might better fit
that purpose as compared to systems based on genes unrelated to their biosynthesis. By using real-time
PCR, a positive correlation between OTA content and DNA quantity has been indicated for P.
nordicum and A. ochraceus [164,170] and more recently, in A. carbonarius [182,202,203]. Such a
correlation has been established with quantitative real-time PCR on mycotoxin biosynthesis genes [73]
or when using primers targeted sequences of housekeeping genes [182].
   Currently, RT- PCR quantification of A. carbonarius in grapes is clearly the best alternative to
conventional methods in order to investigate the relation between OTA producers and OTA content.
With regards to food safety, Atoui et al. [203] established, according to their correlation, that A.
carbonarius DNA content has to be lower than 10 ng DNA g−1 grape berry to fulfill the maximum
OTA permitted levels in the European Union (Commission regulation No. 123/2005 amending
Regulation No. 67 446/2001 as regards to ochratoxin A).
   All the systems described above are based on PCR with genomic target DNA as template to
estimate OTA concentrations in sample materials. Given the fact that biosynthesis of most mycotoxins
is a highly complex process with poorly understood regulation at the transcriptional level as well as
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                    479

being highly influenced by environmental factors; it is important to find correlation between gene
expression and concentrations of compounds.
   A RT-PCR system based on the otapksPN sequence has been used to monitor growth and OTA
production of P. nordicum in wheat [73,170]. A strong correlation between the copy numbers of the
otapksPN gene and the colony forming units (cfu) was observed. In addition, there was a strong
congruence between otapksPN gene expression and OTA production in wheat. It can be used for the
rapid quality assessment of food products by quantitative determination of the fungal biomass. It can
further be used for HACCP (hazard analysis critical control point) purposes to determine the critical
control points (CCP´s) during the production chain under which otapksPN gene expression and
thereby OTA production is possible.
   With the available systems of PCR-based detection and quantification of ochratoxin A described in
this review, the choice of the best method depends on the goal of the study to be conducted. For
example, AFLP and RAPD could be the best choice when the purpose of the study is (1) to show the
polymorphism of some isolated strains belonging to the same species or (2) to discriminate between
relevant OTA producer species. On the other hand, when dealing with the detection of the fungus, the
best way is to conduct conventional PCR using primers designed from housekeeping genes or
mycotoxin biosynthetic genes as described in sections 11.2 and 11.3. Concerning the application of the
described molecular techniques in food, AFLP and RAPD show limitations such as fungal isolation
and preparation of DNA of very high quality. For this reason Real time PCR technology provides an
insight into the mycotoxigenic status of food sample as well as it has the power to estimate its
mycotoxin content.

References

1.   Keeper-Goodman, T.; Scott, P.M. Risk assessment of the mycotoxin ochratoxin. Biomed.
     Environ. Sci. 1989, 2, 179–248.
2.   Miller, J.D.; Trenholm, H.L. Mycotoxins in Grain: Compounds Other than Aflatoxin; Eagan
     Press: St. Paul, MN, USA, 1994.
3.   Bredenkamp, M.W.; Dillen, J.L.M.; Van Rooyen, P.H.; Steyn, P.S. Crystal structures and
     conformational analysis of ochratoxin A and B: Probing the chemical structure causing toxicity.
     J. Chem. Soc. 1989, 2, 1835–1839.
4.   Budavari, S. The Merck Index, 11th ed.; Rahway, N.J., Ed.; Merck & Co.: Rahway, NJ, USA,
     1989; pp. 30–31.
5.   Faucet-Marquis, V.; Pont, F.; Størmer, F.C.; Rizk, T.; Castegnaro, M.; Pfohl Leszkowicz, A.
     Evidence of a new dechlorinated ochratoxin A derivative formed in opossum kidney cell cultures
     after pretreatment by modulators of glutathione pathways: Correlation with DNA-adduct
     formation. Mol. Nurt. Food Res. 2006, 50, 530–542.
6.   Tozlovanu, M.; Faucet-Marquis, V.; Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A.; Manderville, R. Genotoxicity of the
     hydroquinone metabolite of ochratoxin A: Structure-activity relationships for covalent DNA
     adduction. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2006, 19, 1241–1247
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     480

7.    Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A.; Manderville, R.A. Ochratoxin A: An overview on toxicity and
      carcinogenicity in animals and humans. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2007, 51, 61–99.
8.    Manderville, R.A.; Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A. Bioactivation and DNA adduction as a rationale for
      ochratoxin A carcinogenesis. World Mycotoxin J. 2008, 1, 357–367
9.    Miller, J.D. Fungi as contaminants in indoor air. Atmos. Environ. 1992, 26, 2163–2172.
10.   Steyn, P.S. Ochratoxin and related dihydroisocoumarins. In Mycotoxin-Production, Isolation,
      Separation and Purification; Betina, V., Ed.; Elseiver: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1984;
      pp. 183–216
11.   de Jesus, A.E.; Steyn, P.S.; Vleggaar, R.; Wessels, P.A. Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance
      assignments and biosynthesis of the mycotoxin ochratoxin A. J. Chem. Soc. 1980, 1, 52–54.
12.   Pohland, A.E.; Schüller, P.L.; Steyn, P.S.; van Egmond, H. Physico-chemical data for selected
      mycotoxins. Pure Appl. Chem. 1982, 54, 2219–2284.
13.   EL Khoury, A. Champignons Mycotoxinogènes et Ochratoxine A (OTA) et Aflatoxine B1 (AFB1)
      dans les Vignobles Libanais: Occurrence et Origine; Ph.D. Thesis, INP: Toulouse, France, 2007.
14.   Lillehoj, E.B.; Goransson, B. Occurrence of ochratoxin and citrinin producing fungi on
      developing Danish barley grain. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. B 1980, 88, 133–137
15.   Abramson, D. Measurement of ochratoxin A in barely extracts by liquid chromatography mass
      spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. 1987, 391, 315–320.
16.    Bauer, J.; Gareis, M. Ochratoxin A im der Nahrungsmittelkette. J. Vet. Med. Ser. B. 1987, 34,
      613.
17.   Müller, H.M. Decontamination of mycotoxins. I. Physical process. Ubersicht. Tierernähr. 1982,
      10, 95–122.
18.   Trivedi, A.B.; Doi, E.; Kitabatake, N. Detoxification of ochratoxin A on heating under acidic and
      alkaline conditions. Biosci. Biotech. Biochem. 1992, 56, 741–745.
19.    Boudra, H.; Le Bars, P.; Le Bars, J. Thermostability of ochratoxin A in wheat under two
      moisture conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1995, 61, 1156–1158.
20.   Castegnaro, M.; Barek, J.; Frémy, J.M.; Lafontaine, M.; Miraglia, M.; Sansone, E.B.; Telling,
      G.M. Laboratory Decontamination and Destruction of Carcinogens in Laboratory Wastes: Some
      Mycotoxins; International Agency for Research on Cancer: Lyon, France, 1991.
21.   IARC. Some naturally occurring substances, food items and constituents, heterocyclic aromatic
      amines and mycotoxins. In Monograph on evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans; IARC:
      Lyon, France, 1993.
22.   Zimmerli, B.; Dick R. Ochratoxin A in table wine and grape-juice: Occurrence and risk
      assessment. Food Addit. Contam. 1996, 13, 655–668.
23.    Delage, N.; d’Harlingue, A.; Colonna, B.; Ceccaldi, B.C.; Bompeix, G. Occurrence of
      mycotoxins in fruit juices and wines. Food Control 2003, 14, 225–227.
24.   Da Rocha Rosa, C.A.; Palacios, V.; Combina, M.; Fraga, M.E.; De Oliveira Rekson, A.;
      Magnoli, C.E.; Dalcero, A.M. Potential ochratoxin A producers from wine grapes in Argentina
      and Brazil. Food Addit. Contam. 2002, 19, 408–414.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                    481

25.   Shephard, G.S.; Fabiani, A.; Stockenstrom, S.; Mshicileli, N.; Sewram, V. Quantitation of
      ochratoxin A in South African wines. J. Agric. Food. Chem. 2003, 51, 1102–1106.
26.    Visconti, A.; Pascale, M.; Centoze, G. Determination of ocratoxin A in wine by means of
      immunoaffinity column clean-up and high-performance liquid chromatography. J. Chromatogr.
      A 1999, 864, 89–101.
27.   Ospital, M.; Cazabeil, J.M.; Betbede, A.M.; Tricard, C.; Creppy, E.; Medina, B. L’Ochratoxine
      A dans les vins. Œnologie 1998, 169, 16–19.
28.   Otteneder, H.; Majerus, P. Occurence of ochratoin A (OTA) in wines: Influence of the type of
      wine and its geographical origin. Food Addit. Contam. 2000, 17, 793–798.
29.   O'Brien, E.; Heussner, A.H.; Dietrich, D.R. Species-, sex-, and cell type-specific effects of
      ochratoxin A and B. Toxicol Sci. 2001, 63, 256–264
30.   Faucet, V.; Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A.; Dai, J.; Castegnaro, M.; Manderville, R.A. Evidence for
      covalent DNA adduction by Ochratoxin A following chronic exposure to rat and subacute
      exposure to pig. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2004, 17, 1289–1296.
31.   Ribelin, W.E.; Fukushima, K.; Still, P.E. The toxicity of ochratoxin A to ruminants. Can. J.
      Comp. Med. 1978, 42, 172–176.
32.   Elling, F.; Nelsen, J.P.; Lillehoj, E.B.; Thomassen, M.S.; Stormer, F.C. Ochratoxin A induced
      porcine nephropathy: Enzyme and ultrastructural changes after short-term exposure. Toxicon
      1985, 23, 247–254.
33.    Lopez de Cerain, A.; Gonzalez-Penas, E.; Jimenez, A.M.; Bello, J. Contribution to the study of
      ochratoxin A in Spanish wines. Food Addit. Contam. 2002, 19, 1058–1064.
34.   Bejaoui, H. Champignons Ochratoxinogènes et Ochratoxine A (OTA) dans des Vignobles
      Français et procEdés Biologiques de décontamination de l'OTA dans les moûts de raisin; Ph.D.
      Thesis, INP: Toulouse, France, 2005.
35.   Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A. Ochratoxin A and aristolochic acid involvement in nephropathies and
      associated urothelial tract tumours. Arh. Hig. Rada. Toksikol. 2009, 60, 465–483.
36.   Markaki, P.; Delpont, C.; Delpont-Binet, C.; Grosso, F.; Dragacci, S. Determination of
      ochratoxin A in red wine and vinegar bu immunoaffinity high-pressure liquid chromatography. J.
      Food Prot. 2001, 64, 533–537.
37.   Hassen, W.; Abid-Essafi , S.; Achour, A.; Guezzah, N.; Zakhama, A.; Ellouz, F.; Creppy, E.E.;
      Bacha, H. Karyomegaly of tubular kidney cells in human chronic interstitial nephropathy in
      Tunisia: Respective role of Ochratoxin A and possible genetic predisposition. Hum. Exp. Toxicol.
      2004, 23, 339–346
38.   Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A.; et Castegnaro, M. L’Ochratoxine A dans: Mycotoxines: Evaluation et
      gestion du risqué, Lavoisier; Tec & Doc: Paris, France, 1999; pp. 249–278.
39.   Soleas, G.J.; Yan, J.; Goldberg, D.M. Assay of ochratoxin A in wine and beer by high-pressure
      liquid chromatography photodiode array and gas chromatography mass selective detection. J.
      Agric. Food Chem. 2001, 49, 2733–2740.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     482

40.   Brown, M.H.; Szczech, G.M.; Purmalis, B.P. Teratogenic and toxic effects of ochratoxin A in
      rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 1976, 37, 331–338
41.   Mayura, K.; Reddy, R.V.; Hayes, A.W.; Berndt, W.O. Embryocidal, fetotoxic and teratogenic
      effects of ochratoxin A in rats. Toxicology 1982, 25, 175–185
42.   Mayura, K.; Parker, R.; Berndt, W.O.; Philips, T.D. Effect of simultaneous prenatal exposure to
      ochratoxin A and citrinin in the rat. Toxicol. Environ. Health 1984, 13, 553–561
43.   Mayura, K.; Stein, A.E.; Berndt, W.O.; Philips, T.D. Teratogenic effects of ochratoxin A in rats
      with impaired renal function. Toxicology 1984, 32, 277–285
44.   Mayura, K.; Parker, R.; Berndt, W.O.; Philips, T.D. Ochratoxin A-induced teratogenesis in rats:
      Partial protection by phenylalanine. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1984, 48, 1186–1188
45.   Hayes, A.W.; Melton, R.; Smith, S.J. Effect of aflatoxin B, ochratoxin A and rubratoxin B on a
      protozoan, Tetrahymena pyriformis HSM. Bull. Environ. Contamin. Toxicol. 1974, 11, 321–325.
46.   Hood, R.D., Naughton, M.J.; Hayes, A.W. Prenatal effects of ochratoxin A in hamsters.
      Teratology 1976, 13, 11–14.
47.   Gilani, S.H.; Bancroft. J.; Reily. M. Teratogenicity of ochratoxin A in chick embryos. Toxicol.
      Appl. Pharmacol. 1978, 46, 543–546.
48.   More, J.; Galtier, P.; Alvinerie, M. Toxicite de l'ochratoxine A. III. Effets pendant les stades
      initiaux de la gestation chez le rat. Ann. Rech. Vet. 1978, 9, 169–173.
49.   Petzinger, E.; Weidenbach, A. Mycotoxins in the food chain: The role of ochratoxins.
      Livest.Prod. Sci. 2002, 76, 245–250.
50.   Creppy, E.E.; Betbeder, A.M.; Gharbi, A.; Counord, J.; Castegnaro, M.; Bartsch, H.;
      Moncharmont, P.; Fouillet, B.; Chambon, P.; Dirheimer, G. Human ochratoxicosis in France. In
      Mycotoxins, Endemic Nephropathy and Urinary Tract Tumours; Castegnaro, M., Plestina, R.,
      Dirheimer, G., Chernozemsky, I.N., Bartsch, H., Eds.; IARC Scientific Publ.: Lyon, France,
      1991.
51.   Holmberg, T.; Thuvander, A.; Hult, K. Ochratoxin A as a suppressor of mitogen-induced
      blastogenesis of porcine blood lymphocytes. Acta Vet. Scand. 1988, 29, 219–223.
52.   Lea, T.; Steien. K.; Stormer. C. Mechanism of ochratoxin A induced immunosuppresion.
      Mycopathologia 1989, 107, 153–159.
53.   Huff, W.E.; Kubena, L.F.; Harvey, R.B.; Phillips, T.D. Efficacy of hydrated sodium calcium
      aluminosilicate to reduce the individual and combined toxicity of aflatoxin and ochratoxin A.
      Poult Sci. 1992, 71, 64–69
54.   Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A.; Pinelli, E.; Bartsch, H.; Mohr, U.; Castegnaro, M. Sex- and strain-specific
      expression of cytochrome P450s in ochratoxin A-induced genotoxicity and carcinogenicity in
      rats. Mol. Carcinog. 1998, 23, 76–85.
55.   NTP. Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Ochratoxin A (CAS No. 303-47-9) in F344/N
      Rats (Gavage Studies). Technical Report Series No 358; NTIS Publication No. PB90-
      219478/AS; National Toxicology Program: Research Triangle Park, NC and Bethesda, MD,
      USA, 1989.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                      483

56.   Feier, D.; Tofana, M. Ochratoxin A–Toxicological Aspects. Bulletin of University of
      Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Medicine Cluj-Napoca. Agriculture 2009, 66, 308–312.
57.   Van der Merve, K.J.; Steyn, P.S.; Fourie, L.; Scott, D.B.; Theron, J.J. Ochratoxin A, a toxic
      metabolite produced by Aspergillus ochraceus. Nature 1965, 205, 1112–1113.
58.   Varga, J.; Rigó, K.; Téren, J.; Mesterházy, Á. Recent advances in ochratoxin research I.
      Production, detection and occurrence of ochratoxins. Cereal Res. Commun. 2001, 29, 85–92.
59.   Frisvad, J.C.J.; Frank, M.; Houbraken, J.A.M.P.; Kuijpers, A.F.A.; Samson, R.A. New
      ochratoxin A producing species of Aspergillus section Circumdati. Stud. Mycol. 2004, 50, 23–43.
60.   Horie, Y. Productivity of ochratoxin A of Aspergillus carbonarius in Aspergillus section Nigri.
      Nippon Kingakukai Kaiho 1995, 36, 73–76.
61.   IARC. IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention. Weight Control and Physical Activity;
      International Agency for Research on Cancer: Lyon, France, 2002.
62.   Leong, S.; Hocking, A.D.; Pitt, J.I. Occurrence of fruit rot fungi (Aspergillus section Nigri) on
      some drying varieties of irrigated grapes. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 2004, 10, 83–88.
63.   Taniwaki, M.H.; Pitt, J.I.; Teixeira, A.A.; Iamanaka, B.T. The source of ochratoxin A in
      Brazilian coffee and its formation in relation to processing methods. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
      2003, 82, 173–179,
64.   Abarca, L.M.; Accensi, F.; Cano, J.; Cabanes, J.F. Taxonomy of black aspergilli. Ant. van
      Leeuwen. 2004, 86, 33–49.
65.   Dalcero, A.; Magnoli, C.; Hallak, C.; Chiacchiera, S.M.; Palacio, G.; Rosa, C.A. Detection of
      ochratoxin A in animal feeds and capacity to produce this mycotoxin by Aspergillus section
      Nigri in Argentina. Food Addit. Contam. 2002, 19, 1065–1072.
66.   Magnoli, C.; Violante, M.; Combina, M.; Palacio G.; Dalcero, A. Mycoflora and ochratoxin-
      producing strains of Aspergillus section Nigri in wine grapes in Argentina. Lett. Appl. Microbiol.
      2003, 37, 179–184.
67.    Battilani, P.; Giorni, P.; Pietri, A. Epidemiology of toxin producing fungi and ochratoxin A
      occurrence in grape. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2003, 109, 715–722.
68.   Samson, R.A.; Hoekstra, E.S.; Frisvad, J.C. Introduction to Food and Airborne Fungi, 7th ed.;
      Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures: Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2004.
69.   Abarca, M.L.; Accensi, F.; Bragulat, M.R.; Cabanes, F.J. Current importance of ochratoxin A
      producing Aspergillus spp. J. Food Protec. 2001, 903–906.
70.   Ciegler, A. Bioproduction of ochratoxin A and penicillc acid by members of the Aspergillus
      ochraceus group. Can. J. Microbiol. 1972, 18,631–636
71.   Hesseltine, C.W.; Vandegraft, E.E.; Fennell, D.I.; Smith, M.L.; Shotwell, O.L. Aspergilli as
      ochratoxin producers. Mycologia 1972, 64, 539–550.
72.   Frisvad, J.C. Creatine sucrose agar, a differential medium for mycotoxin producing terverticillate
      Penicillium species. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 1985, 1, 109–113.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     484

73.   Geisen, R.; Mayer, Z.; Karolewiez, A.; Farber, P. Development of a real time PCR system for
      detection of Penicillium nordicum and for monitoring ochratoxin A production in foods by
      targeting the ochratoxin polyketide synthase gene. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 2004, 27, 501–504.
74.   Pitt, J.I. Penicillium viridicatum, Penicillium verrucosum, and production of ochratoxin A. Appl.
      Environ. Microbiol. 1987, 53, 266–269.
75.   Lund, F.; Frisvad, J.C. Penicillium verrucosum in cereals indicates production of ochratoxin A.
      J. Appl. Microbiol. 2003, 95, 1117–1123.
76.    Larsen, T.O.; Svendsen, A.; Smedsgaard, J. Biochemical characterization of ochratoxin A-
      producing strains of the genus Penicillium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 3630–3635.
77.   Eskola, M. Study on Trichothecenes, Zearalenone and Ochratoxin A in finnish Cereals:
      Occurrence and Analytical Techniques; Academic dissertation: Skillman, NJ, USA, 2002.
78.    FAO. Agro-ecological assessment for national planning: The example of Kenya. FAO soils
      bulletin No 67. Roma, Italy, 1993.
79.    FAO/WHO. Ochratoxin A. In Safety evaluation of certain mycotoxins in food, Prepared by the
      56th Meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). WHO
      Food Additives Series 47; World Health Organisation: Geneva, Switzerland, 2001; pp. 281–387.
80.    Pittet, A. Natural occurrence of mycotoxins in foods and feeds an updated review. Rev. Med.
      Vet. 1998, 149, 479–492.
81.   Nguyen, M.T.; Tozlovanu, M.; Tran, T.L.; Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A. Occurrence of afl atoxin B1,
      citrinin and ochratoxin A in rice in five provinces of the central region of Vietnam. Food Chem.
      2007, 105, 42–47.
82.   Vega, M.; Muñoz, K.; Sepúlveda, C.; Aranda, M.; Campos, V.; Villegas, R., Villarroel, O. Solid-
      phase extraction and HPLC determination of ochratoxin A in cereals products on Chilean market.
      Food Control 2009, 20, 631–634
83.   Otteneder, H.; Majerus, P. Occurrence of ochratoxin A in wines: Influence of the type of wine
      and its geographical origin. Food Addit. Contam. 2000, 17, 793–798.
84.   Cabañes, F.J.; Accensi, F.; Bragulat, M.R.; Abarca, M.L.; Castella, G.; Minguez, S.; Pons, A.
      What is the source of Ochratoxin A in wine? Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2002, 79, 213–215.
85.   Stefanaki, I.; Foufa, E.; Tsatsou-Dritsa, A.; Dais, P. Ochratoxin A concentrations in Greek
      domestic wines and dried vine fruits. Food Addit. Contam. 2003, 20, 74–83.
86.    Shephard, G.S.; Fabiani, A.; Stockenstrom, S.; Mshicileli, N.; Sewram, V. Quantitation of
      ochratoxin A in south African wines. J. Agri. Food Chem. 2003, 51, 1102–1106.
87.    Castellari, M.; Fabbr, S.; Fabiani, A.; Amati, A.; Galassi, S. Comparison of different
      immunoaffinity clean-up procedures for high-performance liquid chromatographic analysis of
      ochratoxin A in wines. J. Chromatogr. A 2000, 888, 129–136.
88.    Serra, R.; Abrunhosa, L.; Kozakiewicz, Z.; Venâncio, A. Black Aspergillus species as
      ochratoxin A producers in Portuguese wine grapes. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2003, 88, 63–68.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                    485

89.   Bejaoui, H.; Mathieu, F.; Taillandier, P.; Lebrihi A. Biodegradation of ochratoxin A by
      Aspergillus section Nigri species isolated from French grapes: A potential means of ochratoxin A
      decontamination in grape juices and musts. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2006, 255,203–208.
90.   EL Khoury, A.; Rizk, T.; Lteif, R.; Azouri, H.; Delia, M.L.; Lebrihi, A. Occurrence of
      ochratoxin A and aflatoxin B1-producing fungi in Lebanese grapes and OTA content in musts
      and finished wines during year 2004. J. Agri. Food Chem. 2006, 54, 8977–8982.
91.   Wolff, J.; Bresch, H.; Cholmakov-Bodechtel, C.; Engel, G.; Garais, M.; Majerus, P.; Rosner, H.;
      Scheuer, R. Ochratoxin A: Contamination of foods and consumer exposure. Arch Lebensm hyg.
      2000, 51, 181–128.
92.    FAO. Aflatoxin Contamination in Foods and Feeds in the Philippines. Document 13.
      FAO/WHO Regional Conference on Food Safety for Asia and Pacific Seremban, Malaysia,
      2004.
93.    Hussein, H.S.; Brasel, J.M. Toxicity, metabolism, and impact of mycotoxins on humans and
      animals. Toxicology 2001, 167, 101–134.
94.    Van Egmond, H.P.; Svensson, U.K.; Fremy, J.M. Mycotoxins. Int. Dairy Fed. S.I. 1997, 79–88.
95.    Commission Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 of 8 March 2001 setting maximum levels for certain
      contaminants in foodstuffs. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 2001, L77–L113.
96.    European Commission. Commission regulation (EC) No 2003/100/EC of 31 October 2003
      amending Annex I to Directive 2002/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on
      undesirable substances in animal feed. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 2003, 285, 33–37.
97.   European Commission. Commission Regulation (EC) No 2004/683/EC of 13 April 2004
      amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 as regards aflatoxins and ochratoxin A in foods for
      infants and young children (Text with EEA relevance). Off. J. Eur. Commun. 2004, 106, 3–5.
98.    European Commission. 2003. Commission Regulation (EC) No 2003/2174/EC of 12 december
      2003 amending Regulation 466/2001/EC as regards aflatoxins. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 2003, 326,
      12.
99.   Van Egmond, H.P.; Schothorst, R.C.; Jonker, M.A. Regulations relating to mycotoxins in food:
     Perspectives in a global and European context. J. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2007, 389, 147–157
100. WHO. Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. Thirty-seventh report of the joint
     FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. WHO technical report series 806; World
     Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 1991; pp. 29–31.
101. FAO. Biotechnology and food safety. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO consultation. Food and
     Agricultural Organization, Food and Nutrition, 1996.
102. FAO. Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, Fifty‐sixth meeting, Geneva,
     Switzerland, 2001; pp. 6–15.
103. EC European Community. Opinion on of the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) on
     Ochratoxin A, Luxembourg, 1998. Expressed on 17 September.
104. European Commission. Commission Regulation (EC) No 472/2002 of 12 March 2002. Off. J.
      Eur. Commun. 2002, 75, 18–20.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     486

105. European Commission. Commission Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 of 8 March 2001. Off. J.
     Eur. Commun. No. 2001, 77, 1–13.
106. European Commission. Commission Regulation (EC) No 123/2005 of 26 January 2005
     amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 as regards ochratoxin A. Off. J. Eur. Commun. 2005,
     25, 3–5.
107. Senyuva, H.Z.; Gilbert, J.; Ozcan, S.; Ulken, U. Survey of ochratoxin A and afaltoxin B1 in
     dried figs in Turkey using a single laboratory validated alkaline extraction method for ochratoxin
     A. J. Food Protect. 2005, 68, 1512–1515.
108. Levi, C.; Trenk, H.L.; Mohr, H.K. Study of the occurrence of ochratoxin A in green coffee
     beans. J. Assoc. Offic. Anal. Chem. 1974, 57, 866–870.
109. Nesheim, S.; Hardin, N.F.; Francis, O.I.; Langham, W.S. Analysis of ochratoxin A and B and
     their esters in barley: Using partitions and thin-layer chromatography. I Development of the
     method. J. AOAC Int. 1973, 56, 817–821.
110. El Adlouni, C.; Tozlovanu, M.; Naman, F.; Faid, M.; Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A. Preliminary data on
     the presence of mycotoxins (Ochratoxin A, citrinin and aflatoxin B1) in black table olives”
     Greek style” of Moroccan origin. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2006, 50, 507–512.
111. Mac Donald, S.; Wilson, P.; Barnes, K.; Damant, A.; Massey, R.; Mortby, E.; Shephered, M.J.
     Ochratoxin A in dried vine fruit: method development and survey. Food Addit Contam. 1999, 16,
     253–260.
112. Legarda, T.M., Burdaspal, P.A. Ochratoxin A in beers brewed in Spain and other European
     countries. Alimentaria 1998, 291, 115–122.
113. NF EN 14133:2003. Food products. Determination of ochratoxin A in wine and beer - HPLC
     method with immunoaffinity column clean-up. Dansk Standard; Classification index V 03-128.
     IHS: Englewood, CO, USA, 2003.
114. Leoni, L.A.B.; Valente Soares, L.M.; Oliveira, P.L.C. Ochratoxin A in Brazilian roasted and
     instant coffees. Food Addit. Contam. 2000, 17, 10, 867–870.
115. Stegen, V.D.G.; Jorissen, U.; Pittet, A.; Saccon, M.; Steiner, W.; Vincenzi, M.; Winkler, M.;
     Zapp, J.; Schlatter, C. Screening of European coffee final products for occurrence of ochratoxin
     A (OTA). Food Addit. Contam. 1997, 14, 211–216.
116. Valenta, H.; Goll. M. Determination of ochratoxin A in regional samples of cow’s milk from
     Germany. Food Addit. Contam. 1996, 13, 669–676.
117. Entwistle, C.A.; Williams, A.C.; Mann, P.J.; Russell, J.; Slack, P.; Gilbert, J. Combined phenyl
     silane and immunoaffinity column cleanup with liquid chromatography for determination of
     ochratoxin A in roasted coffee; Collaborative study. J. Assoc. Offic. Anal. Chem. Int. 2001, 84,
     444–450.
118. Gilbert, J.; Brereton, P.; MacDonald, S. Assessment of dietary exposure to ochratoxin A in the
     UK using a duplicate diet approach and analysis of urine and plasma samples. Food Addit.
     Contam. 2001, 18, 1088–1093.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                   487

119. Entwistle, A.C.; Williams A.C.; Mann P.J.; Stack P.T.; Gilbert J. Liquid chromatographic
     method with immunoaffinity column clean up for determination of ochratoxin A in barley:
     Collaborative study. J. Assoc. Anal. Comm. 2000, 83, 1377–1383
120. Entwistle, A.C.; Williams, A.C.; Mann, P.J.; Russell, J.; Stack, P.T.; Gilbert, J. Combined
     phenyl silane and immunoaffinity column clean up with liquid chromatography for determination
     of ochratoxin A in roasted coffee: Collaborative study. J. Assoc. Anal. Comm. 2001, 84,
     444–450.
121. Burdaspal, P.; Legarda, T.M.; Gilbert, J. Determination of ochratoxin A in baby food by
     immunoaffinity column cleanup with liquid chromatography: Interlaboratory study. J. Assoc.
     Offic. Anal. Chem. Int. 2001, 84, 1445–1452.
122. Dragacci, S.; Frémy, J.M. Dosage des mycotoxines. In Moisissures des aliments peuhydratés;
     Cahagnier, B., Ed.; Tec et Doc: Paris, France, 1998; pp. 187–207.
123. Wilson, D.M.; Sydenham, E.W.; Lombaert, G.A.; Trucksess, M.W.; Abramson, D.; Bennett,
     G.A. Mycotoxin analytical techniques. In Mycotoxins in Agriculture and Food Safety; Sinha,
     K.K., Bhatnagar, D., Eds.; Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 1998.
124. Fukal, L.; Reisnerova, H. Monitoring of aflatoxins and ochratoxin A in Czechoslovak human
     sera by immunoassay. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 1990, 44, 345–349.
125. Fukal, L.; Marek, M. A screening method for simultaneous immunochemical detection of
     aflatoxins and ochratoxin A in cereals and feed. Vet. Med. 1991, 36, 251–254
126. Rousseau, D.M.; Candlish, A.G.; Slegers, G.A.; Van Peteghem, C.H.; Stimson, W.H.; Smith,
     J.E. Detection of ochratoxin A in porcine kidneys by a monoclonal antibody-based
     radioimmunoassay. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1987, 53, 514–518.
127. Aizawa, M. Immunosensors. Philos. T. R. Soc. B 1987, 316, 121–134.
128. Niessen, L.; Schmidt, H.; Muhlencoert, E.; Farber, P.; Karolewiez, A., Geisen, P. Advances in
     the molecular diagnosis of ochratoxin A-producing fungi. Food Addit. Contam. 2005, 22,
     324–334
129. Edwards, S.G.; O’Callaghan, J.; Dobson, A.D.W. PCR-based detection and quantification of
     mycotoxigenic fungi. Mycol. Res. 2002, 106, 1005–1025.
130. Moss, M.O. Recent studies of mycotoxins. Symp. Ser. Soc. Appl. Microbiol. 1998, 27, 62S–76S.
131. Proctor, R.H.; Desjardins, A.E.; Plattner, R.D.; Hohn, T.M. A polyketide synthase gene required
     for biosynthesis of fumonisin mycotoxins in Gibberella fujikuroi mating population A. Fungal
     Genet. Biol. 1999, 27, 100–112.
132. Bhatnagar, D.; Ehrlich, K.C.; Cleveland, T.E. Molecular genetic analysis and regulation of
     aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2003, 61, 83–93.
133. Varga, J.; Kevei, E.; Rinyu, E.; Teren, J.; Kozakiewicz, Z. Ochratoxin production by Aspergillus
     species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1996, 62, 4461–4464.
134. Huff, W.E.; Hamilton, P.B. Mycotoxins-their biosynthesis in fungi: Ochratoxins-metabolites of
     combined pathways. J. Food Prot. 1979, 42, 815–820.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     488

135. Schulz, B.; Sucker, J.; Aust, H.J.; Krohn, K.; Ludewig, K.; Jones, P.G. and Doring, D.
     Biologically active secondary metabolites of endophytic Pezicula species. Mycol. Res. 1995, 99,
     1007–1015.
136. Venkatasubbaiah, P.; Sutton, T.B.; and Chilton, W.S. Effect of phytotoxins produced by
     Botryosphaeria obtusa, the cause of black rot of apple fruit and frogeye leaf spot. Physiol.
     Biochem. 1991, 81, 243–247.
137. Keller, B.; Winzeler, H.; Winzeler, M. and Fried, P.M. Differential sensitivity of wheat embryos
     against extracts containing toxins of Septoria nodorum: First Steps towards in vitro selection. J.
     Phytopathol. 1994, 141, 233–240.
138. Parisi, A.; Piattelli, M.; Tringali, C.; San Lio G.M.D.; Di San Lio, G.M. Identification of the
     phytotoxin mellein in culture fluids of Phoma tracheiphila; Phytochemistry: Oxford, UK, 1993;
     pp. 865–867.
139. Turner, W.B., Albridge, D.C. Fungal Metabolites; Academic Press Inc.: London, UK, 1983.
140. Camarda, L.; Merlini, L.; Nasini, G. Metabolites of Cercospora. Taiwapyrone, an α-pyrone of
     unusual structure from Cercospora Taiwanensis. Phytochemistry 1976, 15, 537–539.
141. Assante, G.; Locci, R.; Camarda, L.; Merlini, L. and Nasini, G. Screening of the genus
     Cercospora for secondary metabolites. Phytochemistry 1977, 16, 243–247.
142. Claydon, N.; Grove, J.F.; Pople, M. Insecticidal secondary metabolic products from the
     entomogenous fungus Fusarium larvarum. J. Invert. Pathol. 1979, 33,364–367
143. Krohn, K.; Bahramsari, R.; Florke, U.; Ludewig, K.; Kliche-Spory, C.; Michel, A.; Aust, H.J.;
     Draeger, S.; Schulz, B.; Antus, S. Dihydroisocoumarins from fungi: Isolation, structure
     elucidation, circular dichroism and biological activity. Phytochemistry 1997, 45, 313–320.
144. Harris, J.P.; Mantle, P.G. Biosynthesis of diaporthin and orthosporin by Aspergillus ochraceus.
     Phytochemistry 2001, 57, 165–169.
145. Bingle, L.E.; Simpson, T.J.; Lazarus, C.M. Ketosynthase domain probes identify two subclasses
     of fungal polyketide synthase genes. Fungal Genet. Biol. 1999, 26, 209–223.
146. Liou, G.F.; Khosla, C. Building-block selectivity of polyketide synthases. Curr. Opin. Chem.
     Biol. 2003, 7, 1–6.
147. Nicholson, T.P.; Rudd, B.A.M.; Dawson, M.; Lazarus, C.M.; Simpson, T.J.; Cox, R.J. Design
     and utility of oligonucleotide gene probes for fungal polyketide synthases. Chem. Biol. 2001, 8,
     157–178.
148. O’Callaghan, J.; Caddick, M.X.; Dobson, A.D.W. A polyketide synthase gene required for
     ochratoxin A biosynthesis in Aspergillus ochraceus. Microbiology 2003, 149, 3485–3491.
149. Varga, J.; Rigó, K.; Kocsubé, S.; Farkas, B.; Pál, K. Diversity of polyketide synthase gene
     sequences in Aspergillus species. Res. Microbiol. 2003, 154, 593–600.
150. Atoui, A.; Dao., P.; Mathieu, F.; Lebrihi, A. Amplification and diversity analysis of
     Ketosynthase domains of putative polyketide synthase gene in Aspergillus ochraceus and
     Aspergillus carbonarius producers of ochratoxin A. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2006, 50, 448–493.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     489

151. Karolewiez, A.; Geisen, R. Cloning a part of the ochratoxin A biosynthetic gene cluster of
     Penicillium nordicum and characterisation of the ochratoxin polyketide synthase gene. Syst.
     Appl. Microbiol. 2005, 28, 588–595.
152. Bacha, N.; Atoui, A.; Mathieu, F.; Liboz, T.; Lebrihi A. Aspergillus westerdijkiae polyketide
     synthase gene "aoks1" is involved in the biosynthesis of ochratoxin A. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2009,
     46, 77–84.
153. Sidhu, G.S. Mycotoxin genetics and gene clusters. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2002, 108, 705–711.
154. Yu, J.; Keller, N. Regulation of secondary metabolism in filamentous fungi. Annu. Rev.
     Phytopathol. 2005, 43, 437–458.
155. Brown, D.W.; Yu, J.H.; Kelkar, H.S.; Fernandes, M.; Nesbitt, T.C.; Keller, N.P.; Adams, T.H.;
     Leonard, T.J. Twenty-five coregulated transcripts define a sterigmatocystin gene cluster in
     Aspergillus nidulans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1996, 93, 1418–1422.
156. Kato, N.; Brooks, W.; Calvo, A.M. The expression of sterigmatocystin and penicillin genes in
     Aspergillus nidulans is controlled by veA, a gene required for sexual development. Eukaryot.
     Cell 2003, 2, 1178–1186.
157. Yu, J.; Chang, P.K.; Ehrlich, K.C.; Cary, J.W.; Bhatnagar, D.; Cleveland, T.E.; Payne, G.A.;
     Linz, J.E.; Woloshuk, C.P.; Bennett, J.W. Clustered pathway genes in aflatoxin biosynthesis.
     Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70, 1253–1262
158. O’Callaghan, J.; Stapleton, P.C; Dobson, A.D.W. Ochratoxin A biosynthetic genes in Aspergillus
     ochraceus are differentially regulated by pH and nutritional stimuli. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2006,
     43, 213–221.
159. Yu, J.; Chang, P.-K.; Cary, J.W.; Bhatnagar, D.; Cleveland, T.E. avnA, a gene encoding a
     cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase, is involved in the conversion of averantin to averufin in
     aflatoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus parasiticus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1997, 63,
     1349–1356.
160. Ward, T.J.; Bielawski, J.P.; Kistler, H.C.; Sullivan, E.; O’Donnell, K. Ancestral polymorphism
     and adaptive evolution in the trichothecene mycotoxin gene cluster of phytopathogenic
     Fusarium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002, 99, 9278–9283.
161. Ehrlich, K.C.; Chang, P.-K.; Yu, J.; Cotty, P.J. Aflatoxin biosynthesis cluster gene cypA is
     required for G aflatoxin formation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70, 6518–6524.
162. Dao, H.P.; Mathieu, F.; Lebrihi, A. Two primer pairs to detect OTA producers by PCR method.
     Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2005, 104, 61–67.
163. Pel, H.J.W.; de Winde, J.H.; Archer, D.B.; Dyer, P.S.; Hofmann, G.; Schaap, P.J.; Turner, G.; de
     Vries, R.P.; Albang, R.; Albermann, K.; et al. Genome sequencing and analysis of the versatile
     cell factory Aspergillus niger CBS 513.88. Nat. Biotechnol. 2007, 25, 221–231.
164. Hendrickson, L.; Davis, C.R.; Roach, C.; Nguyen, D.K.; Aldrich, T.; Mcada, P.C.; Reeves, C.D.
     Lovastatin biosynthesis in Aspergillus terreus: characterization of blocked mutants, enzyme
     activities and a multifunctional polyketide synthase gene. J. Chem. Biol. 1999, 6, 429–439.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                   490

165. Kennedy, J.; Auclair, K.; Kendrew, S.G.; Park, C.; Vederas, J.C.; Hutchinson, C.R. Modulation
     of polyketide synthase activity by accessory proteins during lovastatin biosynthesis. Science
     1999, 284, 1368–1372.
166. Abe, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Ono, C.; Iwamoto, K.; Hosobuchi, M.; Yoshikawa, H. Molecular cloning
     and characterization of an ML-236B (compactin) biosynthetic gene cluster in Penicillium
     citrinum. Mol. Genet. Genom. 2002, 267, 636–646.
167. Kim, Y.T.; Lee, Y.R.; Jin, J.; Han, K.H.; Kim, H.; Kim, J.C.; Lee, T.; Yun, S.H.; Lee, Y.W. Two
     different polyketide synthase genes are required for synthesis of zearalenone in Gibberella zea.
     Mol. Microbiol. 2005, 58, 1102–1113.
168. Baker, S.E.; Kroken, S.; Asvarak, T.; Inderbitzin, P.; Li, B.Y.; Shi, L.; Yoder, O.C.; Turgeon,
     B.G. Two polyketide synthase-encoding genes are required for biosynthesis of the polyketide
     virulence factor, T-toxin, by Cochliobolus heterostrophus. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 2006,
     19, 139–149.
169. Botton, A.; Ferrigo, D.; Scopel, C.; Causin, R.; Bonghi, C.; Ramina, A. A cDNA-AFLP
     approach to study ochratoxin A production in Aspergillus carbonarius. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
     2008, 127, 105–115
170. Farber, P.; Geisen, R. Analysis of differentially expressed ochratoxin A biosynthesis genes of
     Penicillium nordicum. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2004, 110, 661–669.
171. Karolewiez, A.; Geisen R. Cloning a part of the OTA biosynthetic gene cluster of Penicillium
     nordicum and characterization of the ochratoxin polyketide synthase gene. Syst. Appl. Microbiol.
     2005, 28, 588–595.
172. Farber, P.; Geisen, R.; Holzapfel, W.H. Detection of aflatoxigenic fungi in figs by a PCR
     reaction. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 1997, 36, 215–220.
173. Saiki, R.K.; Gelfand, D.H.; Stoffel, S.; Sharf, S.J.; Higuchi, R.; Horn, G.T.; Mullis, K.B.;
     Ehrlich, H.A. Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with a thermostable DNA
     polymerase. Science 1988, 239, 487–491.
174. Pelegrinelli-Fungaro M.H.; Vissoto P.C., Sartori, D., Vioas-Boas, L.A.; Furlaneto, M.C.;
     Taniwaki, M.H. A molecular method for detection of Aspergillus carbonarius in coffee beans.
     Curr. Microbiol. 2004, 49,123–127.
175. Schmidt H.; Ehrmann, M.; Vogel, R.F.; Taniwaki, M.H.; Niessen, L. Molecular typing of
     Aspergillus ochraceus and construction of species specific SCAR-primers based on AFLP. Syst.
     Appl. Microbiol. 2003, 26, 434–438.
176. Schmidt, H.; Bannier, M.; Vogel, R.F.; Niessen L. Detection and quantification of Aspergillus
     ochraceus in green coffee by PCR. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2004, 38, 464–469.
177. Schmidt, H.; Taniwaki, M.H.; Vogel, R.F.; Niessen, L. Utilization of AFLP markers for PCR-
     based identification of Aspergillus carbonarius and indication of its presence in green coffee
     samples. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2004, 97, 899–909.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                     491

178. Vos, P.; Hogers, R.; Bleeker, M.; Reijans, M.; Van de Lee, T.; Hornes, M.; Frijters, A.; Pot, J.;
     Peleman, J.; Kuiper, M.; Zabeau, M. AFLP: A new technique for DNA fingerprinting. Nucl.
     Acids Res. 1995, 23, 4407–4414.
179. Castella, G.; Larsen, T.O.; Cabanes, F.J.; Schmidt, H.; Alboresi, A.; Niessen, L.; Farber, P.;
     Geisen, R. Molecular characterization of ochratoxin A producing strains of the genus
     Penicillium. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 2002, 25, 74–83.
180. Perrone, G.; Susca, A.; Stea, G.; Mule, G. PCR assay for identification of Aspergillus
     carbonarius and Aspergillus japonicus. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2004, 110, 641–649.
181. Susca, A.; Stea, G.; Mule, G.; Perrone, G. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) identification of
     Aspergillus niger and Aspergillus carbonarius based on the calmodulin gene. Food Addit.
     Contam. 2007, 24, 1154–1160
182. Mulè, G.; Susca, A.; Logrieco, A.; Stea, G.; Visconti, A. Development of a quantitative real-time
     PCR assay for the detection of Aspergillus carbonarius in grapes. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2006,
     111, 28–34.
183. Morello, L.G.; Sartori, D.; Martinez, A.L.O.; Carneiro Vieira, M.L.; Taniwaki, M.H.; Pelegrinelli
     Fungaro, M.H. Detection and quantification of Aspergillus westerdijkiae in coffee beans based
     on selective amplification of β-tubulin gene by using real-time PCR. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
     2007, 119, 270–276
184. White, T.J.; Bruns, T.; Lee, S.; Taylor, J. Amplification and direct sequencing of fungi ribosomal
     RNA genes for phylogenetics. In PCR Protocols. A Guide to Methods and Applications; Innis,
     M.A., Gelfand, D.H., Sninsky, J.J., White, T.J., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA, USA,
     1990; pp. 315–322.
185. Martínez-Culebras, P.V.; Ramón, D. An ITS-RFLP method to identify black Aspergillus isolates
     responsible for OTA contamination in grapes and wine. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2007, 113,
     147–153.
186. Kappe, R.; Fauser, C.; Okeke, C.N.; Maiwald, M. Universal fungus-specific primer systems and
     group-specific hybridization oligonucleotides for 18 rDNA. Mycoses 1996, 39, 25–30.
187. Zhou, G.; Whong, W.Z.; Ong, T.; Chen, B. Development of a fungus-specific PCR assay for
     detecting low-level fungi in an indoor environment. Mol. Cell Probes 2000, 14, 339–348.
188. Vanittanakom, N.; Vanittanakom, P.; Hay, R.J. Rapid identification of Penicillium marneffei by
     PCR-based detection of specific sequences on the rRNA gene. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2002, 40,
     1739–1742.
189. Hinukson, H.P.; Hurst, S.F.; Lott, T.J.; Warnock, D.N.; Morrison, C.J. Assessment of ribosomal
     large subunit D1–D2, ITS 1 and ITS 2 regions as targets for molecular identification of medically
     important Aspergillus species. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2005, 43, 2092–2103.
190. Gonzalez-Salgado, A.; Patno, B.; Vazquez, C.; Gonzalez-Jaen, M.T. Discrimination of
     Aspergillus niger and other Aspergillus species belonging to section Nigri by PCR assays. FEMS
     Microbiol. Lett. 2005, 245, 353–361
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                   492

191. Patino, B.; Gonzalez-Salgado, A.; Gonzalez-Jaen, M.T.; Vazquez, C. PCR detection assays for
     the ochratoxin-producing Aspergillus carbonarius and Aspergillus ochraceus species. Int. J.
     Food Microbiol. 2005, 104, 207–214.
192. Accensi, F.; Cano, J.; Figuera, L.; Abarca, M.L.; Cabanes, F.J. New PCR method to differentiate
     species in the Aspergillus niger aggregate. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1999, 180, 191–196.
193. Zanzotto, A.; Burruano, S.; Marciano, P. Digestion of DNA regions to discriminate
     ochratoxigenic and non-ochratoxigenic strains in the Aspergillus niger aggregate. Int. J. Food
     Microbiol. 2006, 110, 155–159
194. Niessen, L. Current trends in molecular diagnosis of ochratoxin A producing fungi. In
     Mycotechnology—Present Status and Future Prospects; Rai, M.; Ed.; I.K. International
     Publishing House: New Delhi, India, 2007; p. 320.
195. Shapira, R.; Paster, N.; Eyal, O.; Menasherov, M.; Mett, A.; Salomon, R. Detection of
     aflatoxingenic molds in grains by PCR. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1996, 62, 3270–3273.
196. Geisen, R. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction for the detection of potential aflatoxin and
     sterigmatocystin producing fungi. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 1996, 19, 388–392.
197. Niessen, M.L.; Vogel, R.F. Specific identification of Fusarium graminearum by PCR with gaoA
     targeted primers. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 1997, 20, 111–123.
198. Paterson, R.R.M. Identification and quantification of mycotoxigenic fungi by PCR. Process
     Biochem. 2006, 41, 1467–1474
199. Bluhm, B.H.; Flaherty, J.E.; Cousin, M.A.; Woloshuk, C.P. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction
     assay for the differential detection of trichothecene- and fumonisin-producing species of
     Fusarium in cornmeal. J. Food Prot. 2002, 65, 1955–1961.
200. Gonzalez-Jaen, M.T.; Mirete, S.; Patino, B.; Lopez-Errasquin, E.; Covadonga, V. Genetic
     markers for the analysis of variability and for production of specific diagnostic sequences in
     fumonisin-producing strains of Fusarium verticillioides. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2004, 110,
     525–532.
201. Paterson, R.R.M. Primers from the isoepoxydon dehydrogenase gene of the patulin biosynthetic
     pathway to indicate critical control points for patulin contamination of apples. Food Control
     2006, 17, 741–744.
202. Selma, M.V.; Martínez-Culebras, P.V.; Aznar, R. Real-time PCR based procedures for detection
     and quantification of Aspergillus carbonarius in wine grapes. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2008, 122,
     126–134
203. Atoui, A.; Mathieu, F.; Lebrihi, A. Targeting a polyketide synthase gene for Aspergillus
     carbonarius quantification and ochratoxin A assessment in grapes using real-time PCR. Int. J.
     Food Microbiol. 2007, 115, 313–318
204. Witter, C.T.; Herrmann, M.G.; Moss, A.A.; Rasmussen, A.P. Continuous fluorescence
     monitoring of rapid cycle DNA amplification. Biotechniques 1997, 22, 130–138.
Toxins 2010, 2                                                                                   493

205. González-Salgado, A.; Patiño, B.; Gil-Serna, J.; Vázquez, C.; González-Jaén, M.T. Specific
     detection of Aspergillus carbonarius by SYBR® Green and TaqMan® quantitative PCR assays
     based on the multicopy ITS2 region of the rRNA gene. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2009, 295, 57–66.
206. Livak, K.J.; Flood, S.P.A.; Marmejo, J.; Giusti, W.; Deetz, K. Oligonucleotides with fluorescent
     dyes at opposite ends provide a quenched probe system useful for detecting PCR products and
     nucleic acid hybridization. PCR Met. Appl. 1995, 4, 357–362.

© 2010 by the authors; licensee Molecular Diversity Preservation International, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative
Commons Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).
