              nutrients
Review
Coffee and Lower Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: Arguments for a
Causal Relationship
Hubert Kolb 1,2 , Stephan Martin 1,2 and Kerstin Kempf 2, *

                                          1   Faculty of Medicine, University of Duesseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany;
                                              hubert.kolb@hhu.de (H.K.); stephan.martin@uni-duesseldorf.de (S.M.)
                                          2   West-German Centre of Diabetes and Health, Duesseldorf Catholic Hospital Group, Hohensandweg 37,
                                              40591 Duesseldorf, Germany
                                          *   Correspondence: kerstin.kempf@wdgz.de; Tel.: +49-211-566036016


                                          Abstract: Prospective epidemiological studies concur in an association between habitual coffee
                                          consumption and a lower risk of type 2 diabetes. Several aspects of these studies support a cause–
                                          effect relationship. There is a dependency on daily coffee dose. Study outcomes are similar in different
                                          regions of the world, show no differences between sexes, between obese versus lean, young versus
                                          old, smokers versus nonsmokers, regardless of the number of confounders adjusted for. Randomized
                                          controlled intervention trials did not find a consistent impact of drinking coffee on acute metabolic
                                          control, except for effects of caffeine. Therefore, lowering of diabetes risk by coffee consumption does
                                          not involve an acute effect on the post-meal course of blood glucose, insulin or insulin resistance.
                                          Several studies in animals and humans find that the ingestion of coffee phytochemicals induces
                                          an adaptive cellular response characterized by upregulation and de novo synthesis of enzymes
                                          involved in cell defense and repair. A key regulator is the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
         
                                   (Nrf2) in association with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, AMP-activated kinase and sirtuins. One
Citation: Kolb, H.; Martin, S.;
                                          major site of coffee actions appears to be the liver, causing improved fat oxidation and lower risk
Kempf, K. Coffee and Lower Risk of        of steatosis. Another major effect of coffee intake is preservation of functional beta cell mass via
Type 2 Diabetes: Arguments for a          enhanced mitochondrial function, lower endoplasmic reticulum stress and prevention or clearance
Causal Relationship. Nutrients 2021,      of aggregates of misfolded proinsulin or amylin. Long-term preservation of proper liver and beta
13, 1144. https://doi.org/10.3390/        cell function may account for the association of habitual coffee drinking with a lower risk of type 2
nu13041144                                diabetes, rather than acute improvement of metabolic control.

Academic Editors: Jason Tallis and        Keywords: coffee; diabetes; caffeine; chlorogenic; acids; hepatosteatosis; beta cells; hormesis; Nrf2
Neil D. Clarke


Received: 9 March 2021
Accepted: 27 March 2021
                                          1. Introduction
Published: 31 March 2021
                                                The perception of coffee has experienced a remarkable transition from a stimulant
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          drink which may stress your cardiovascular system to a beverage that is good for your
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          health. The latter view is derived from a large number of prospective cohort studies which
published maps and institutional affil-   observed an association of socioeconomic or lifestyle factors including habitual coffee
iations.                                  consumption and clinical outcomes including type 2 diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic fatty
                                          liver disease, liver cancer, gout, kidney stones and Parkinson’s disease [1].
                                                In this paper, we discuss the association of habitual coffee consumption and a lower
                                          risk of type 2 diabetes. In addition to epidemiological studies, data are available from a con-
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          siderable number of randomized short-term intervention trials with metabolic endpoints,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          and from Mendelian randomization studies. Finally, we consider that coffee constituents
This article is an open access article
                                          appear to exert similar molecular effects at the cellular level as reported for phytochemi-
distributed under the terms and           cals of other dietary plants. From these data, a picture emerges how coffee consumption
conditions of the Creative Commons        promotes resistance to the development of type 2 diabetes.
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://           This paper is a narrative review and commentary based on a survey of all papers listed
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          by PubMed for the search items coffee, caffeine or chlorogenic acid, in combination with
4.0/).                                    the items diabetes, glucose tolerance or insulin resistance, respectively. Other papers were



Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13041144                                            https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                             2 of 17



                           retrieved from the reference list of reviews published on coffee, caffeine or chlorogenic acid
                           versus metabolic endpoints. To the best of our knowledge, we included and dis-cussed
                           all published human trials of coffee consumption versus metabolic endpoints. For the
                           discussion of a possible molecular mechanism, we conducted an additional search in
                           PubMed with the items coffee/caffeine/chlorogenic acid in combination with the items
                           Nrf2/anti-oxidative/anti-inflammatory, respectively.

                           2. Epidemiological Studies
                                 Although epidemiological studies cannot prove a causal relationship all recent meta-
                           analyses considered it probable that coffee consumption lowers the risk of type 2 diabetes [1–4].
                           Up to 30 prospective cohort studies were included in the meta-analyses, with more than
                           a million participants, and more than 50,000 cases during a follow-up period of up to
                           24 years. When comparing the cohorts with the highest category of coffee consumption
                           (median around 5 cups per day) versus no coffee consumption, the pooled relative risk
                           of type 2 diabetes was around 0.7. The risk decreased by ~6 % for each additional cup of
                           coffee consumed, and this relationship was fairly linear except for a possible flattening of
                           the curve for the small subgroups drinking more than six cups per day.
                                 Observational studies suffer from different characteristics of subgroups drinking
                           none, little or much coffee. Consumption of none or little coffee may be due to intestinal
                           intolerance, religious reasons or simply dislike or prejudice. It is virtually impossible
                           to correct for this type of confounding. The number of confounders considered in the
                           various studies is limited (listed in [3]). For instance, one important confounder that is
                           not recognized in any of the studies, is brushing of teeth. This may happen more often in
                           coffee consumers to prevent staining of teeth, and at the same time it lowers the risk of
                           periodontitis, a major risk factor of low grade systemic inflammation and type 2 diabetes [5].
                           Other diabetes risk factors not considered as confounders include exposure to traffic noise
                           or fine dust.
                                 Nonetheless, it seems improbable that residual confounding accounts for the associa-
                           tion of coffee consumption with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes, for the following reasons.
                           (i) Results of prospective cohort studies are surprisingly similar in different regions of the
                           world (Europe, USA, Asia) although lifestyle and cultural background differ. (ii) There is
                           no significant difference in outcome for men and women. (iii) Sub-analyses for study par-
                           ticipants with obesity (body mass index > 25), with age above 50 years or for non-smokers
                           also observed an inverse association of coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes [6,7].
                           (iv) A similar inverse association was reported for drinking unfiltered boiled coffee as well
                           as for filtered coffee [8,9]. (v) It is difficult to consider a confounder that is responsible
                           for the linear relationship between quantity of coffee consumed and risk of diabetes. (vi)
                           Studies that correct for only six possible confounders report similar outcomes as studies
                           that considered 15 or more possible confounders (data from [3]).
                                 Another epidemiological approach is to correlate changes in coffee consumption pat-
                           tern with diabetes outcome. Three large prospective studies in the USA of 16–20 years
                           duration and documentation of dietary habits every four years were analyzed for changes
                           in coffee consumption [10]. An increase of daily coffee consumption by > 1 cup (me-
                           dian 1.69 cups) was associated with an 11% lower relative risk of type 2 diabetes com-
                           pared to those who made no changes. Conversely, a decrease in consumption by > 1 cup
                           (median 2 cups) was associated with a 17% higher risk of type 2 diabetes. In order to
                           minimize the chance of reverse causation, the subgroups were adjusted for baseline dif-
                           ferences and for later changes that may have caused altered coffee consumption, such as
                           increased/decreased physical activity or cardiovascular disease. Interestingly, changes in
                           tea consumption were not associated with changes in diabetes risk.
                                 Taken together, epidemiological studies concur on an inverse association of habitual
                           coffee consumption with risk of type 2 diabetes. The association with diabetes risk is as
                           robust as that of other lifestyle factors not tested in randomized long-term trials such as
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                            3 of 17



                           physical activity, sitting time, sleep duration, smoking or exposure to traffic noise and fine
                           dust [11].

                           3. Mendelian Randomization Studies
                                Genome-wide association studies have identified several genetic variants seen more
                           often in coffee drinkers than non-drinkers [12–15]. The strongest effect size is seen for gene
                           variants that are involved in caffeine metabolism. Heavy coffee consumption is associated
                           with gene variants allowing faster caffeine breakdown. Many of the variants associated
                           with coffee consumption are also associated with other traits and therefore might modulate
                           the risk of type 2 diabetes via other pathways than promoting coffee consumption [16].
                                Several Mendelian randomization studies have searched for a higher diabetes risk in
                           carriers of gene variants promoting coffee consumption, but results remained inconclusive
                           or did not show a causal link with incident type 2 diabetes or other health outcomes [15–17].
                           One probable reason is that the genetic tolerance of higher caffeine intake may promote
                           consumption of any caffeine containing drink including black or green tea, but consumption
                           of the latter is not consistently associated with lower diabetes risk [18,19]. Furthermore,
                           genetic variants account for less than half a cup of coffee consumed, i.e., about 40 mg
                           caffeine [12] which may be too small to account for different diabetes risk. When the
                           same large cohort (DIAbetes Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM)) was
                           analyzed for partially different sets of genetic variants found associated with coffee or
                           caffeine consumption in previous cohorts, one analysis did not observe an association
                           of genetically determined caffeine consumption with diabetes risk [15] whereas another
                           analysis found a significant link between diabetes risk and genes variants promoting
                           caffeine or coffee consumption, respectively [20].
                                As described above, changes in coffee consumption in individuals followed in prospec-
                           tive studies was accompanied with an inverse change of diabetes risk while this was not
                           the case for tea [10]. In this setting, genetic characteristics of participants do not differ
                           before and after modification of coffee consumption habits.
                                We conclude that there is no major influence of individual genetic characteristics
                           associated with coffee consumption regarding the risk of type 2 diabetes. The responsible
                           molecular mechanism involved seems directly linked to coffee consumption and not
                           dependent on genetic variants promoting coffee/caffeine consumption.

                           4. No Acute Impact on Metabolic Control: Caffeinated Coffee
                                It has been difficult to identify acute metabolic effects of coffee consumption in random-
                           ized controlled intervention trials except for effects of caffeine. The major pharmacological
                           activity of caffeine is inhibition of adenosine receptors and modulation of the puriner-
                           gic system because of the molecular similarity to adenosine [4,21]. As a consequence,
                           adenosine-mediated vasodilation and many additional physiological functions of adeno-
                           sine, notably in the brain, are antagonized. Tolerance to these caffeine effects develops
                           within a week of daily coffee consumption but may be incomplete and lost as rapidly
                           during caffeine abstinence [4]. Trials of caffeinated coffee or caffeine usually have a run-in
                           phase of little or no caffeine consumption. Therefore, tolerance to caffeine is decreased and
                           acute effects of caffeine become recognizable but disappear again after a longer period of
                           coffee/caffeine intake. Acute effects of coffee or caffeine include modestly reduced appetite,
                           an increased metabolic rate/thermogenesis and reduced insulin sensitivity [22–32]. It is
                           probable that the enhanced activity of the sympathetic nervous system and increased
                           epinephrine release is a major contributor to these acute metabolic responses [4,23,24].
                                The acute metabolic effects of caffeinated coffee or caffeine did not persist after longer
                           periods of coffee consumption. A 24-week trial with 126 overweight Asian participants
                           reported no significant change of insulin sensitivity after daily consumption of 4 cups of
                           caffeinated coffee compared to a coffee-like placebo drink. There was also no difference in
                           fasting glucose [33]. A trial in 45 overweight Japanese participants with mild-to-moderate
                           elevation of fasting blood glucose found no change in oral glucose tolerance measures
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                            4 of 17



                           nor of insulin sensitivity after 8 weeks of daily consumption of 5 cups of caffeinated or
                           decaffeinated coffee compared to water. After 16 weeks, the post load glucose levels
                           were mildly decreased in the caffeinated coffee group only [34]. A trial in 45 overweight
                           North American participants reported no change in insulin sensitivity and oral glucose
                           tolerance after consumption of caffeinated or decaffeinated coffee for 8 weeks, compared
                           with water [35]. The only long-term metabolic effects of caffeinated coffee consumption
                           compared with control was a ~4 % decrease of fat mass (after 24 weeks [33]) or a ~2 cm
                           reduction in waist circumference (after 16 weeks [34]).
                                 Taken together, habitual consumption of caffeinated coffee does not impact metabolic
                           control of glucose and insulin levels but may have a mild effect in favor of caffeine-
                           mediated body fat/visceral fat loss. In the long term, these changes may be sufficient for
                           lowering the risk of type 2 diabetes, because lifestyle intervention trials have shown that
                           modest lowering of body weight by 5%–7% is already associated with a decreased diabetes
                           rate [36]. However, several prospective cohort studies compared outcomes for caffeinated
                           and decaffeinated coffee and report similarly decreased diabetes risk for both types of
                           coffee. Meta-analyses revealed a relative risk of type 2 diabetes for each cup-per-day
                           increase in coffee consumption of 7%–9% for caffeinated coffee and 6 % for decaffeinated
                           coffee, difference not significant [3,37].
                                 It, therefore, may be concluded that the presence of caffeine in coffee and the accom-
                           panying modest decrease in body fat is not essential for its apparent diabetes-protective
                           effect although there may be a minor contribution. Other constituents of coffee must be
                           viewed as candidates for lowering the risk of type 2 diabetes.

                           5. No Acute Impact on Metabolic Control: Decaffeinated Coffee
                                 Decaffeinated coffee contains only very small amounts of caffeine [38] so that beneficial
                           effects of other coffee constituents on metabolic control may become apparent. More than
                           10 randomized controlled trials of acute effects of decaffeinated coffee consumption on the
                           metabolic response to subsequent ingestion of glucose or a high glycemic index meal have
                           been performed, without providing a clear message.
                                 Three trials did not report on a control group with water or placebo fluid consumption
                           instead of coffee, and therefore, do not provide sound evidence [28,39,40]. Three further
                           trials did not notice an impact of decaffeinated coffee consumption on the course of
                           blood glucose or insulin levels in response to a glucose load [41–43]. One trial observed
                           a transiently increased glucose level in response to a high glycemic index meal but no
                           difference in overall glucose or insulin levels when comparing decaffeinated coffee and
                           water [44]. A few trials measured incretin levels and/or insulin sensitivity and reported
                           no or mild and not consistent changes in the decaffeinated coffee groups. These possible
                           effects were not reflected by an impact on blood glucose or insulin kinetics [41,43,45].
                           Conversely, one trial reported transiently increased blood glucose and persistently elevated
                           insulin levels during an oral glucose tolerance test after consuming decaffeinated coffee
                           compared with water, but no impact on insulin sensitivity was seen [46].
                                 After 8 weeks of daily drinking decaffeinated coffee (n = 14) there was no difference
                           to the water control (n = 15) with respect to the glucose and insulin response to an oral
                           glucose load, or with regard to insulin resistance, in healthy, middle-aged and overweight
                           persons [35]. Another trial also reported no impact on oral glucose tolerance after 16 weeks
                           of consumption of decaffeinated coffee (n = 17) versus water (n = 13) [34].
                                 The trials usually included 10–17 participants, and these were young, metabolically
                           healthy and lean persons (overweight middle-aged participants in only one study). Several
                           endpoints were analyzed at different points of time, usually without correction for the high
                           number of statistical tests performed. Taken together, the trials do not provide evidence
                           for an acute effect on metabolic control after consumption decaffeinated coffee. Long-term
                           trials would be required to analyze for a delayed impact of metabolic control and the
                           prevention of metabolic deterioration or with diabetes as clinical endpoint. Such trials
                           currently do not appear feasible.
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                 5 of 17



                                A summary of conclusions from observational and randomized controlled studies of
                           coffee consumption is given in Box 1.

                           Box 1. Findings of observational and randomized studies.

                           •    Prospective cohort studies find a lower risk of type 2 diabetes associated with habitual coffee
                                consumption.
                           •    The association with diabetes risk is dose dependent, seen world-wide and in both sexes, and
                                is also found for decaffeinated coffee.
                           •    The association with diabetes risk is seen regardless of the number of potential confounders
                                adjusted for.
                           •    Changes of coffee consumption over time are accompanied by a change of diabetes risk.
                           •    Mendelian randomization studies do not provide consistent results on the association of
                                diabetes risk with a genetic background favoring caffeine/coffee consumption. However, the
                                genetic effect size on caffeine/coffee intake is modest.
                           •    Randomized controlled trials do not observe a consistent acute impact of coffee consumption
                                on metabolic control except for some beneficial effects of caffeine on appetite and body fat
                                mass. Long term trials with diabetes as endpoint are not feasible.


                           6. Candidate Mechanisms for a Delayed Impact on Metabolic Control: Metabolomics
                                Because randomized controlled trials of short duration failed to uncover a consistent
                           caffeine-independent modulatory effect of coffee consumption on systemic insulin or
                           glucose levels after a meal or glucose challenge, other physiological responses appear to be
                           relevant. These include delayed impact on metabolic control and prevention of metabolic
                           deterioration.
                                One approach to identify relevant physiological responses to coffee is to screen for
                           an impact on a wide variety of circulating components of metabolism, other than insulin
                           and glucose. A recent analysis of the Nurses’ Health Study II identified three cholesteryl
                           esters associated with coffee consumption and lower diabetes risk. Conversely, five dia-
                           cylglycerols and seven triacylglycerols showed negative associations with coffee-related
                           diabetes risk factors [47]. A lipidomic analysis revealed a decrease of most lipid metabolites,
                           including cholesteryl ester and triacylglycerols. How these changes related to diabetes
                           risk was not studied [48]. Analyses of the metabolomic response to coffee consumption
                           have observed that many different metabolic pathways are affected ranging from steroid
                           synthesis to amino acid metabolism [49–52]. Taken together, metabolomic analyses have
                           identified many changes caused by coffee consumption, but the possible relationship to a
                           lower diabetes risk remains unresolved.

                           7. Candidate Mechanisms for a Delayed Impact on Metabolic Control: Known Actions
                           of Phytochemicals
                                Many phenolic phytochemicals exhibit concentration-dependent toxic properties
                           which include DNA damage, mutagenesis, carcinogenesis and cell death. Organs affected
                           include the liver, intestine and kidney. Tumor cells appear to be more susceptible than
                           normal cells [53–61].
                                The studies have been performed with high doses of phenolic compounds from
                           foods like coffee, tea or other edible plants. Despite these potentially toxic properties,
                           vegetarian food is well tolerated by the human organism. The reason is the subtoxic dose
                           of phytochemicals taken up with our daily diet. Postprandial blood concentrations of
                           major dietary phenolics may reach a few µmol/l but usually are lower [62,63]. Cytotoxicity
                           towards healthy cells is observed at concentrations of 10 µmol/l or higher, depending
                           on the phenolic compound and cell type tested. In humans, at present the only phenolic
                           compounds for which an upper limit of consumption is recommended, because of possible
                           hepatotoxicity, are green tea catechins [64].
                                Coffee appears to be a safe beverage in that regard except for high intakes of caf-
                           feine, especially during pregnancy [65]. Randomized controlled trials of moderate cof-
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                           6 of 17



                           fee consumption for several months have not identified detrimental physiological re-
                           sponses [33,35,66]. We excluded caffeine from the following discussion of antidiabetic
                           coffee effects because epidemiological studies find decaffeinated coffee almost as strongly
                           associated with a lower risk for type 2 diabetes as caffeinated coffee.
                                 After consumption of one cup of coffee, peak blood concentrations of chlorogenic
                           acid metabolites were about 1 µmol/l, whereas pyridine derivatives trigonelline and 1-
                           methylpyridinium reached peak concentrations of 6 and 1 µmol/l. Peak concentrations are
                           below the micromolar range for all other phytochemicals in coffee, except for caffeine [67].
                           Even at these low concentrations, coffee phytochemicals and their metabolites interact with
                           many components of cells and organs. Cellular targets for physical binding of phytochemicals
                           include the complex of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and Kelch-like ECH-
                           associating protein-1 (Keap1) [68–71], the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) [72–75], protein
                           disulfide isomerase3 [76], 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase [77], protein
                           kinase B (AKT) [78], glutathione S-transferase pi isoform-1 [79], vascular endothelial growth
                           factor receptor [80], PPARγ [81], amyloid forming peptides [55,82–87], basic proline-rich
                           protein in saliva [88], human serum albumin [89,90] or low density lipoprotein [91].
                                 Most of these interactions are weak at micromolar or submicromolar concentrations
                           but randomized controlled trials of coffee consumption in humans report one major cellular
                           response, the increased expression of proteins involved in the defense against free radicals,
                           xenobiotics or UV irradiation, improved cell regeneration, DNA repair and cell survival,
                           as well as dampening of pro-inflammatory activities [92]. These reactions primarily occur
                           by activation of the Nrf2/Keap1 system and the AHR, and they can be considered as an
                           adaptive response to the mild chemical stress mediated by phytochemicals of coffee or
                           other plants. Keap1 and AHR are sensors for xenobiotics that target cysteine residues
                           (Keap1) or a hydrophobic binding region (AHR) for electrophilic/hydrophobic compounds
                           among phytochemicals which initiates a cascade of events resulting in upregulation of
                           cellular defense mechanisms.
                                 As described in detail previously [92], Nrf2 is a nuclear factor which binds to charac-
                           teristic DNA sequences (electrophile/antioxidant response elements) in the 50 -upstream
                           regions of a large number of genes involved in cell defense, giving rise to increased gene
                           transcription. Cytoprotective actions include the expression of antioxidant enzymes and
                           xenobiotic detoxifying enzymes, stress proteins, increased turnover of misfolded proteins,
                           improved mitochondrial biogenesis and function, decreased expression of the immunoregu-
                           latory nuclear factor NFkB and of pro-inflammatory molecules like tumor necrosis factor-α
                           or the NLRP3 (NOD-like receptor family, pyrin domain containing 3) inflammasome.
                                 There is continuous de novo synthesis of Nrf2, most of which is captured by cytosolic
                           Keap1 and channeled to proteasomal degradation. Keap1 is highly sensitive to an elec-
                           trophile attack by phytochemicals because of its 17 cysteine residues and readily loses its
                           ability to recycle Nrf2 and prevent its translocation to the nucleus where it targets the DNA
                           sequences described above. Phytochemicals may also indirectly activate the Nrf2/Keap1
                           system by increasing the intracellular levels of oxygen radical species or nitric oxide all of
                           which target cysteine residues of Keap 1. Free oxygen radical species including H2 O2 may
                           be either generated directly by phenolics extra- or intracellularly, in the presence of Cu(II)
                           or Fe(III) ions [55,56,60,93,94], or may come from mitochondria [95–100].
                                 Electrophilic phytochemicals including those of coffee may also target the aryl hydro-
                           carbon receptor [73,74]. This nuclear factor is stabilized in the cytoplasm by a chaperone
                           complex and kept in an inactive state. Upon binding of a suitable electrophilic ligand AHR
                           and some components of the cytoplasmic complex translocate to the nucleus where they
                           promote the expression of genes involved in detoxifying xenobiotics by binding to xenobi-
                           otic response elements (XRE). In addition, AHR interacts with other transcription factors
                           involved in various cellular regulation circuits [101]. Activation of AHR activates Nrf2 by
                           several mechanisms such as increased Nrf2 gene expression or reactive oxygen species
                           (ROS) production from AHR induced cytochrome P450 1A enzyme activity [102,103].
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                            7 of 17



                                 While the Nrf2/Keap1 and AHR systems respond to increased levels of electrophiles
                           or free radicals, another approach of sensing danger in cells is monitoring the energy
                           level. The response to phytochemical stress is expected to affect cellular energy reserve.
                           A low energy state is characterized by low ATP/AMP and ADP/ATP ratios as well as
                           low glucose levels. This condition leads to the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase
                           (AMPK). This group of enzymes increase energy production and decreases energy uses
                           by phosphorylation and promoting acetylation of many metabolic enzymes, histones and
                           transcription factors. There is also activation of histone deacetylases of the sirtuin family
                           by provision of NAD+ which promotes mitochondrial function, autophagy and a gene
                           expression pattern supporting cell survival during various forms of stress including those
                           mediated by phytochemicals [104–106]. The activation of AMPK and sirtuin 1 in cells
                           exposed to phytochemicals is associated with the activation of the Nrf2/Keap1-system,
                           forming a regulatory network [78,107].
                                 The possible health effect of coffee is supported by findings that several different
                           components of coffee are able to activate the Nrf2/Keap1 or AHR systems in isolated
                           cells, animals and humans. Chlorogenic acid and its degradation product caffeic acid are
                           strong activators of Nrf2 activity [108–110] as also reported for melanoidins [111], kahweol
                           and cafestol [112–114]. Another coffee constituent, trigonelline, inhibits Nrf2 activation
                           possibly by interfering with the epidermal growth factor signaling pathway [108,115].
                           Roasting of coffee causes thermal degradation of trigonelline and the accumulation of
                           degradation products nicotinic acid and pyridine derivatives like N-methylpyridinium
                           and 1,2-dimethylpyridinium [63,67]. The pyridine derivatives are potent activators or Nrf2
                           and AHR dependent gene expression [108,116]. For N-methylpyridinium, a concentration
                           of 0.1µmol/l was found sufficient for activating Nrf2 [108].
                                 Taken together, there is evidence that consumption of coffee activates a cell protective,
                           Nrf2 and AHR dependent cell response in a systemic manner [116] which includes the
                           gut lining [111] (Figure 1). As reviewed previously, this physiological response to coffee
                           drinking is analogous to the response following the ingestion of phytochemicals from other
                           plants [92]. A special role of coffee in the uptake of dietary phytochemicals follows from
                           the observation that coffee is the major dietary source of phenolics, providing about 70% in
                           the diet and even surpassing green tea phenolics even in Japan [117–119].
                                 The upregulation of cell protective regulatory circuits in response to the ingestion
                           of coffee appears to occur in many organs of the body, as judged from analyses of liver,
                           hepatocytes, stomach, blood lymphocytes, endothelial cells, muscle cells and the small
                           intestine [73,109–111,113,116,120–125]. The available data suggest that a Nrf2-dependent
                           mechanism for the antidiabetic action of coffee may focus on the liver and the beta cell.
                                 Coffee and liver: In vivo imaging using a luciferase-reporter gene system in rodents
                           showed that the liver is the main organ responding to coffee ingestion with the expression
                           of Nrf2-regulated genes [121]. Feeding of decaffeinated coffee upregulated liver expres-
                           sion of endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial chaperones as well as antioxidative
                           enzymes [122,123] and concomitantly prevented or mitigated the development of non-
                           alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) during a high fat diet. Both caffeine and phenolic
                           coffee constituents like chlorogenic acids contribute to these effects which include reduced
                           oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress, increased autophagy/lipophagy, fatty acid
                           ß-oxidation and lipolysis, in conjunction with improved mitochondrial activity and de-
                           creased levels of liver transaminases [126–128]. Deficient handling of saturated fats by
                           mitochondria is considered a key factor in the development of liver steatosis [129]. There
                           is only limited data on the modulation of the microbiota by coffee constituents except for
                           increased production of short chain fatty acids and an improved intestinal barrier function.
                           The latter may contribute to the prevention of NAFLD by lowering exposure of the liver to
                           pro-inflammatory microbial components [122,130,131].
                                 In accordance with the animal experiments, prospective studies of coffee consumption
                           versus incident NAFLD or liver cirrhosis in humans reported an inverse relationship [132,
                           133]. There is a non-linear dose-dependency, and a meta-analysis reported a significant
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                                                        8 of 17



                                       negative association at >3 cups of coffee per day [132]. It, therefore, seems probable that
                                       habitual coffee consumption leads to more effective hepatic handling of lipids which,
                                       together with less leakage of pro-inflammatory compounds from the microbiota decreases
       Nutrients 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                           8 of 18
                                       the risk of NAFLD, cirrhosis and type 2 diabetes.




             Figure 1. Activation of the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)/Kelch-like ECH-associating protein-1
                1. Activation
      Figure(Nrf2/Keap1)           of and
                              system  the nuclear     factor binding
                                           of hydrophobic       erythroid      2-related
                                                                          region    (AHR) factor      2 (Nrf2)/Kelch-like
                                                                                              by phytochemicals      in roastedECH-associating           protein-1
                                                                                                                                   (decaffeinated) coffee.
             Major coffee
      (Nrf2/Keap1)           constituents
                         system    and of exhibit  binding binding
                                           hydrophobic       propertiesregion
                                                                           to a number
                                                                                     (AHR)ofby  cellular targets. Consistent
                                                                                                    phytochemicals              physiological
                                                                                                                         in roasted               responsescoffee.
                                                                                                                                         (decaffeinated)
      Majorare    elicited
               coffee      by direct (electrophilic)
                       constituents  exhibit binding binding    to cysteine
                                                          properties           residues of
                                                                        to a number        of Keap1
                                                                                              cellularand  to AHR,
                                                                                                        targets.      causing the
                                                                                                                  Consistent         translocationresponses
                                                                                                                                  physiological      of Nrf2     are
             and AHR, respectively, to the nucleus and the increased expression of genes involved in cell protective activities. Fur-
      elicited by direct (electrophilic) binding to cysteine residues of Keap1 and to AHR, causing the translocation of Nrf2 and
             thermore, there is increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), either directly generated from reactive phe-
      AHR, nolics
              respectively,   to thevia
                      or indirectly  nucleus   and the
                                        perturbation    ofincreased
                                                           mitochondrialexpression
                                                                               function. ofCysteine
                                                                                            genes involved
                                                                                                      residues in
                                                                                                                of cell
                                                                                                                    Keap1protective     activities.
                                                                                                                             act as sensors         Furthermore,
                                                                                                                                               of oxidative
      there isstress.
                increased   production
                      The resulting      of reactive
                                     modification   of oxygen     species
                                                        Keap1 allows        (ROS),
                                                                          Nrf2         either directly
                                                                                  to translocate   to thegenerated
                                                                                                          nucleus. Cellfrom   reactive
                                                                                                                           stress  may phenolics
                                                                                                                                          result in a or indirectly
                                                                                                                                                      lower
             energy level of
      via perturbation      and  increased concentrations
                               mitochondrial     function. of    adenosine
                                                               Cysteine         monophosphate
                                                                            residues      of Keap1(AMP)
                                                                                                      act asand  (nicotinamide
                                                                                                              sensors               adenine
                                                                                                                         of oxidative         dinucleotide)
                                                                                                                                           stress.  The resulting
             NAD+ which causes the activation of AMP-activated kinase and of sirtuins, respectively. AMPK lowers anabolic and in-
      modification of Keap1 allows Nrf2 to translocate to the nucleus. Cell stress may result in a lower energy level and increased
             creases catabolic activities for increasing (adenosine triphosphate) ATP levels. Sirtuins deacetylate histones and other
      concentrations      of adenosine
             targets leading              monophosphate
                                to improved                      (AMP) and
                                              mitochondrial function,              (nicotinamide
                                                                             increased     autophagyadenine
                                                                                                        and thedinucleotide)
                                                                                                                  expression of genesNAD+mediating
                                                                                                                                               which causes
                                                                                                                                                         im- the
             proved cell survival during periods of stress. ↑, upregulation; ↓ downregulation
      activation   of  AMP-activated      kinase   and   of sirtuins,   respectively.      AMPK      lowers   anabolic    and   increases     catabolic   activities
      for increasing (adenosine triphosphate) ATP levels. Sirtuins deacetylate histones and other targets leading to improved
      mitochondrial function, increased autophagy Coffee and   andliver:
                                                                     the In   vivo imaging
                                                                          expression             using
                                                                                          of genes       a luciferase-reporter
                                                                                                      mediating    improved cellgene         system
                                                                                                                                       survival       in rodents
                                                                                                                                                  during   periods
                                            showed
      of stress. ↑, upregulation; ↓ downregulation     that  the   liver  is  the   main    organ   responding      to  coffee  ingestion      with  the  expres-
                                            sion of Nrf2-regulated genes [121]. Feeding of decaffeinated coffee upregulated liver ex-
                                            pression
                                               Coffeeofand  endoplasmic
                                                                beta cells:reticulum          and mitochondrial
                                                                                  Loss of functional         beta cellchaperones         as well to
                                                                                                                          mass in relation         as insulin
                                                                                                                                                      antioxida-require-
                                            tive enzymes [122,123] and concomitantly prevented or mitigated the development of
                                        ments is the critical process causing type 2 diabetes [134]. The lower incidence of type 2
                                            nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) during a high fat diet. Both caffeine and phe-
                                        diabetes in habitual coffee drinkers therefore likely involves better preservation of beta cell
                                            nolic coffee constituents like chlorogenic acids contribute to these effects which include
                                        function.
                                            reduced oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress, increased autophagy/lipophagy,
                                               Prospective
                                            fatty                 studies
                                                   acid ß-oxidation       andindicate
                                                                                 lipolysis,that    increased with
                                                                                              in conjunction    insulin      secretion
                                                                                                                        improved            and hyperinsulinemia
                                                                                                                                       mitochondrial      activity
                                        precedes     type    2   diabetes       in  most    people     [135,136].      The
                                            and decreased levels of liver transaminases [126–128]. Deficient handling of     high     synthesis     rate   of insulin is
                                                                                                                                                       saturated
                                        associated     with    increased       production       of  ROS,   mostly     from   mitochondria,
                                            fats by mitochondria is considered a key factor in the development of liver steatosis [129].           with   endoplasmic
                                        stress,
                                            There accumulation
                                                    is only limitedofdata   improper
                                                                                   on the folded
                                                                                             modulationpeptides
                                                                                                             of theand     subsequent
                                                                                                                       microbiota             loss constituents
                                                                                                                                       by coffee    of endocrine cell
                                        function
                                            except and      eventually
                                                     for increased           cell deathof[137–141].
                                                                         production            short chain fatty acids and an improved intestinal
                                            barrier  function. The
                                               Upregulation              latter activity
                                                                     of Nrf2       may contribute
                                                                                              in betatocells
                                                                                                           the prevention      of NAFLDcounteracts
                                                                                                               by phytochemicals               by lowering the ex- dam-
                                            posure
                                        aging        of the
                                                 effects    ofliver  to pro-inflammatory
                                                                glucolipotoxicity                  microbial
                                                                                            (in vitro)    or a components
                                                                                                                high fat diet    [122,130,131].
                                                                                                                                     (in vivo) [142–146]. In beta
                                                  In accordance
                                        cells under      oxidativewith       the Nrf2
                                                                        stress      animal    experiments,
                                                                                           activation     helpsprospective
                                                                                                                   to lowerstudies
                                                                                                                                 the level of coffee
                                                                                                                                               of ROS consump-
                                                                                                                                                          and increase
                                            tion versus    incident    NAFLD        or  liver  cirrhosis  in humans      reported
                                        the production of NADPH to a range required for physiological glucose stimulated in-          an  inverse   relationship
                                            [132,133]. There is a non-linear dose-dependency, and a meta-analysis reported a signif-
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                                                 9 of 17



                                       sulin secretion [147]. Proof of a causal role of Nrf2 for preservation of functional beta
                                       cells comes from studies of genetic manipulation of Nrf2 activation. A knockdown of the
                                       Nrf2 gene substantially reduced the defense response of beta cells towards oxidative and
                                       nitrosative damage, disturbed mitochondrial function and diminished glucose-stimulated
                                       beta cell proliferation [148,149]. Conversely, knockdown of the keap 1 gene led to acti-
                                       vation of Nrf2 which largely prevented diabetes development and beta cell loss in the
                                       spontaneously diabetic db/db mice, and also prevented diabetes development in a high
                                       calorie-diet model [150]. Preservation of islet histology and less steatohepatitis was also
                                       seen in a mouse model of spontaneous metabolic syndrome after adding coffee to the
                                       drinking water [151].
                                             Coffee phytochemicals such as 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid, pyrocatechol and melanoidins
                                       as well as polyphenols from other plants can preserve cell function in periods of
                                       metabolic stress also by interfering with the aggregation of misfolded proteins into
                                       amyloids [85–87,152–154]. Aggregation of misfolded proinsulin or amylin molecules in
                                       beta cells is known to precede the onset of type diabetes and to impair cell functions [155].
                                             Taken together, coffee phytochemicals can sustain beta cell function and survival
                                       (Figure 2). There is activation of Nrf2 leading to sustained upregulation of anti-oxidative
                                       defense, improved mitochondrial function and biogenesis and prevention of cell damage
                                       during periods of high insulin secretion in the prediabetic state. Further, several coffee
                                       constituents interfere with the aggregation of misfolded proinsulin and amylin observed in
                                       beta cells during periods of high biosynthetic activity. These effects of coffee components
                                       fit with long-term preservation of functional beta cell mass rather than acute improvement
                                       of insulin secretion, and are therefore, in line with the lack of an acute metabolic
       Nutrients 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                                                                                                              effect of
                                                                                                                         10 of 18
                                       (decaffeinated) coffee.




             Figure 2. Protective action of coffee on metabolic stress in islet beta cells and hepatocytes. Exposure to coffee or its major
      Figure 2. Protective action of coffee on metabolic stress in islet beta cells and hepatocytes. Exposure to coffee or its major
             constituents leads to activation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), in vitro as well as in vivo. Enhanced
      constituents    leads
             expression      to activation
                          of Nrf2 regulated of   nuclear
                                              genes  leads factor  erythroid
                                                            to improved         2-relatedfunction
                                                                          mitochondrial    factor 2and(Nrf2), in vitro
                                                                                                         oxidation       as well
                                                                                                                    of lipids, andastoin vivo. Enhanced
                                                                                                                                       mitigating of
      expression    of Nrf2reticulum
             endoplasmic     regulated(ER)genes   leads
                                              stress     to improved
                                                      in cells          mitochondrial
                                                               during periods              function
                                                                                of increased  peptideand   oxidation
                                                                                                        synthesis.      of lipids,
                                                                                                                   In beta           andinsulin
                                                                                                                             cells, the   to mitigating
                                                                                                                                                pro-    of
             ductionreticulum
      endoplasmic      capacity is(ER)
                                   further  preserved
                                        stress  in cellsby  eliminating
                                                         during   periodsaggregates   of misfolded
                                                                            of increased             proinsulin or
                                                                                           peptide synthesis.    In amylin   by increased
                                                                                                                    beta cells,   the insulinautoph-
                                                                                                                                               production
             agy, and by prevention of aggregation by binding of coffee phytochemicals to hydrophobic surface regions exposed by
      capacity   is further preserved by eliminating aggregates of misfolded proinsulin or amylin by increased autophagy, and
             misfolded peptides. In hepatocytes, metabolic activity is preserved and steatosis prevented by improved mitochondrial
      by prevention     of aggregation
             beta-oxidation                byincreased
                              of fatty acids,  binding of    coffee phytochemicals
                                                          autophagy   for lipid disposalto  hydrophobic
                                                                                          and               surface
                                                                                               less inflammatory      regions
                                                                                                                   stress  from exposed
                                                                                                                                  activated by  misfolded
                                                                                                                                             Kupffer
      peptides.
             cellsIn hepatocytes,
                   because           metabolic activity(LPS)
                            of less lipopolysaccharide      is preserved   and the
                                                                 leakage from   steatosis
                                                                                    colon. prevented    by improved
                                                                                           ↑, upregulation;              mitochondrial beta-oxidation
                                                                                                             ↓ downregulation
      of fatty acids, increased autophagy for lipid disposal and less inflammatory stress from activated Kupffer cells because of
      less lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leakage 8. Conclusions
                                                     from the colon. ↑, upregulation; ↓ downregulation

                                           Box 2         Key Messages
                                           •    Prospective epidemiological studies find a robust association of habitual coffee con-
                                                sumption (caffeinated or decaffeinated) with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes.
                                           •    Results of Mendelian randomization studies remain inconclusive, possibly because
                                                of a small effect size.
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                 10 of 17



                           8. Conclusions
                                A summary of conclusions is given in Box 2.

                           Box 2. Key Messages

                           •    Prospective epidemiological studies find a robust association of habitual coffee consumption
                                (caffeinated or decaffeinated) with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes.
                           •    Results of Mendelian randomization studies remain inconclusive, possibly because of a small
                                effect size.
                           •    Randomized controlled trials do not show a consistent effect of coffee intake on acute metabolic
                                control, except for some effects of caffeine.
                           •    Metabolomic analyses also do not provide a clear picture how coffee might modulate metabolic
                                control.
                           •    Phytochemicals of coffee or other dietary plants are known to induce an adaptive cell response
                                characterized by activation of Nrf2, AHR, AMPK and sirtuins.
                           •    Most coffee phytochemicals and metabolites accumulate in the liver. The resulting Nrf2-
                                dependent toxic stress response improves mitochondrial function, lipid oxidation and reduces
                                the risk of steatosis.
                           •    Data on modulation of the gut microbiota are scarce, but there seems to be an improved
                                intestinal barrier function which will contribute to the prevention of steatosis.
                           •    Coffee phytochemicals support the preservation of pancreatic beta cell function via Nrf2-
                                mediated resistance to cell damage during periods of high insulin secretion. In addition, coffee
                                constituents directly interact with misfolded peptides and prevent the formation of cell-toxic
                                amyloids.
                           •    Long-term effects of habitual coffee consumption appears to maintain proper function of liver
                                and beta cells rather than improve acute metabolic control.



                                Although epidemiological studies consistently find an association of habitual coffee
                           consumption formal proof of a cause-effect relationship is lacking. However, several
                           aspects of observational prospective studies strongly argue against a major influence of
                           residual confounding and support an antidiabetic effect of coffee. Results of prospective
                           observational studies are surprisingly similar for different regions of the world, including
                           coffee-dose dependency, no difference between male versus female, obese versus lean,
                           younger versus older study participants, regardless of the number of confounders adjusted
                           for. Analyses for habitual consumption of decaffeinated coffee yielded similar results as
                           for caffeinated coffee [3,6,7]. Changes in coffee consumption over time correlated with
                           changes in diabetes risk [10]. Results of Mendelian randomization studies did not help to
                           prove or disprove causality because they were not consistent and suffered from a small
                           effect size [12,15–17,20].
                                Short-term randomized controlled trials comparing consumption of coffee versus
                           water or a placebo drink did not provide clues about the possible mechanism of diabetes
                           prevention. Aside from acute consequences of caffeine intake there were no consistent
                           effects on diabetes-relevant metabolic parameters such as the insulin and glucose response
                           to a glucose load or to a meal. Insulin sensitivity was not modulated (see detailed descrip-
                           tion above). We conclude that a diabetes-preventive effect of coffee does not bear on acute
                           metabolic responses but must exhibit a delayed impact on metabolic control and prevent
                           metabolic deterioration.
                                One consistent biochemical response to the consumption of coffee phytochemicals
                           is an improved antioxidative defense in animals and humans, such as elevated levels of
                           glutathione, catalase and superoxide dismutase [123,156,157]. Mechanistic studies revealed
                           a key role of the activation of Nrf2 and inactivation of Keap1, complemented by engaging
                           AHR, AMPK and sirtuins [92].
                                The liver is the primary organ for the accumulation of coffee phytochemicals and
                           metabolites [121]. The ensuing protective Nrf2-dependent cell response involves improved
                           mitochondrial function and ß-oxidation of fatty acids which prevents liver steatosis in
                           rodents fed a high fat diet [126–128]. Liver function is further supported by an increased
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                          11 of 17



                                  intestinal barrier function, probably mediated by a prebiotic effect of coffee constituents on
                                  the colon microbiota [122,130,131]. Other modulatory effects of coffee on gut functions that
                                  might be relevant for diabetes prevention have not been reported.
                                        Besides the liver, the other prominent target for a long-term diabetes-preventive effect
                                  of coffee consumption is probably the pancreatic beta cell. In the prediabetic period,
                                  beta cells are exposed to metabolic stress associated with obesity and insulin resistance.
                                  Glucolipotoxicity involves deficient mitochondrial function and endoplasmic reticulum
                                  stress which leads to beta cell dysfunction, dedifferentiation or death [134–136]. Activation
                                  of the Nrf2 system appears to counteract these cell damaging processes and help maintain
                                  proper cell functions. Nrf2 therefore may be considered the “master and captain of beta
                                  cell fate” [147]. In beta cells synthesizing hormones at high rate, aggregates of misfolded
                                  proinsulin or amylin may accumulate and contribute to cell toxicity [141,155]. Coffee
                                  phytochemicals can directly bind to misfolded peptides which prevents or reverses amyloid
                                  formation [152,153].
                                        Taken together, habitual coffee consumption may lower the risk of type 2 diabetes by
                                  preventing the deterioration of liver and beta cell function during chronic metabolic stress
                                  preceding the manifestation of overt diabetes.

                                  Author Contributions: H.K. developed the concept, drafted the manuscript, and had primary
                                  responsibility for final content. K.K. and S.M. were responsible for discussion of the concept and
                                  critical revision of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                                  the manuscript.
                                  Funding: The authors thank the Gesellschaft von Freunden und Förderern der Heinrich-Heine-
                                  Universität Düsseldorf e.V. for financial support.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Acknowledgments: We thank F.W. Scott, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, for reading
                                  the manuscript.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: H.K. received fees for providing consultant services to Tchibo GmbH. K.K. and
                                  S.M. reported no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design; collection, analyses, or
                                  interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish.

References
1.    Poole, R.; Kennedy, O.J.; Roderick, P.; Fallowfield, J.A.; Hayes, P.C.; Parkes, J. Coffee consumption and health: Umbrella review of
      meta-analyses of multiple health outcomes. BMJ 2017, 359, j5024. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Grosso, G.; Godos, J.; Galvano, F.; Giovannucci, E.L. Coffee, Caffeine, and Health Outcomes: An Umbrella Review. Annu. Rev.
      Nutr. 2017, 37, 131–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Carlstrom, M.; Larsson, S.C. Coffee consumption and reduced risk of developing type 2 diabetes: A systematic review with
      meta-analysis. Nutr. Rev. 2018, 76, 395–417. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Van Dam, R.M.; Hu, F.B.; Willett, W.C. Coffee, Caffeine, and Health. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 383, 369–378. [CrossRef]
5.    Wu, C.Z.; Yuan, Y.H.; Liu, H.H.; Li, S.S.; Zhang, B.W.; Chen, W.; An, Z.J.; Chen, S.Y.; Wu, Y.Z.; Han, B.; et al. Epidemiologic
      relationship between periodontitis and type 2 diabetes mellitus. BMC Oral Health 2020, 20, 204. [CrossRef]
6.    Van Dam, R.M.; Hu, F.B. Coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review. JAMA 2005, 294, 97–104. [CrossRef]
7.    Jiang, X.; Zhang, D.; Jiang, W. Coffee and caffeine intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of prospective
      studies. Eur. J. Nutr. 2014, 53, 25–38. [CrossRef]
8.    Hjellvik, V.; Tverdal, A.; Strom, H. Boiled coffee intake and subsequent risk for type 2 diabetes. Epidemiology 2011, 22, 418–421.
      [CrossRef]
9.    Tuomilehto, J.; Hu, G.; Bidel, S.; Lindstrom, J.; Jousilahti, P. Coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus among
      middle-aged Finnish men and women. JAMA 2004, 291, 1213–1219. [CrossRef]
10.   Bhupathiraju, S.N.; Pan, A.; Manson, J.E.; Willett, W.C.; van Dam, R.M.; Hu, F.B. Changes in coffee intake and subsequent risk of
      type 2 diabetes: Three large cohorts of US men and women. Diabetologia 2014, 57, 1346–1354. [CrossRef]
11.   Kolb, H.; Martin, S. Environmental/lifestyle factors in the pathogenesis and prevention of type 2 diabetes. BMC Med. 2017, 15,
      131. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                             12 of 17



12.   Cornelis, M.C.; Monda, K.L.; Yu, K.; Paynter, N.; Azzato, E.M.; Bennett, S.N.; Berndt, S.I.; Boerwinkle, E.; Chanock, S.; Chatterjee,
      N.; et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies regions on 7p21 (AHR) and 15q24 (CYP1A2) as determinants of habitual caffeine
      consumption. PLoS Genet. 2011, 7, e1002033. [CrossRef]
13.   Amin, N.; Byrne, E.; Johnson, J.; Chenevix-Trench, G.; Walter, S.; Nolte, I.M.; Vink, J.M.; Rawal, R.; Mangino, M.; Teumer, A.; et al.
      Genome-wide association analysis of coffee drinking suggests association with CYP1A1/CYP1A2 and NRCAM. Mol. Psychiatry
      2012, 17, 1116–1129. [CrossRef]
14.   Cornelis, M.C.; Byrne, E.M.; Esko, T.; Nalls, M.A.; Ganna, A.; Paynter, N.; Monda, K.L.; Amin, N.; Fischer, K.; Renstrom, F.;
      et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies six novel loci associated with habitual coffee consumption. Mol. Psychiatry 2015, 20,
      647–656. [CrossRef]
15.   Said, M.A.; van de Vegte, Y.J.; Verweij, N.; van der Harst, P. Associations of Observational and Genetically Determined Caffeine
      Intake With Coronary Artery Disease and Diabetes Mellitus. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2020, 9, e016808. [CrossRef]
16.   Cornelis, M.C.; Munafo, M.R. Mendelian Randomization Studies of Coffee and Caffeine Consumption. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1343.
      [CrossRef]
17.   Nicolopoulos, K.; Mulugeta, A.; Zhou, A.; Hypponen, E. Association between habitual coffee consumption and multiple disease
      outcomes: A Mendelian randomisation phenome-wide association study in the UK Biobank. Clin. Nutr. 2020, 39, 3467–3476.
      [CrossRef]
18.   Yang, J.; Mao, Q.X.; Xu, H.X.; Ma, X.; Zeng, C.Y. Tea consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and
      meta-analysis update. BMJ Open 2014, 4, e005632. [CrossRef]
19.   Liu, X.; Xu, W.; Cai, H.; Gao, Y.T.; Li, H.; Ji, B.T.; Shu, X.; Wang, T.; Gerszten, R.E.; Zheng, W.; et al. Green tea consumption and
      risk of type 2 diabetes in Chinese adults: The Shanghai Women’s Health Study and the Shanghai Men’s Health Study. Int. J.
      Epidemiol. 2018, 47, 1887–1896. [CrossRef]
20.   Yuan, S.; Larsson, S.C. An atlas on risk factors for type 2 diabetes: A wide-angled Mendelian randomisation study. Diabetologia
      2020, 63, 2359–2371. [CrossRef]
21.   Stefanello, N.; Spanevello, R.M.; Passamonti, S.; Porciuncula, L.; Bonan, C.D.; Olabiyi, A.A.; Teixeira da Rocha, J.B.; Assmann,
      C.E.; Morsch, V.M.; Schetinger, M.R.C. Coffee, caffeine, chlorogenic acid, and the purinergic system. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2019, 123,
      298–313. [CrossRef]
22.   Lane, J.D.; Feinglos, M.N.; Surwit, R.S. Caffeine increases ambulatory glucose and postprandial responses in coffee drinkers with
      type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2008, 31, 221–222. [CrossRef]
23.   Harpaz, E.; Tamir, S.; Weinstein, A.; Weinstein, Y. The effect of caffeine on energy balance. J. Basic Clin. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2017,
      28, 1–10. [CrossRef]
24.   Keijzers, G.B.; De Galan, B.E.; Tack, C.J.; Smits, P. Caffeine can decrease insulin sensitivity in humans. Diabetes Care 2002, 25,
      364–369. [CrossRef]
25.   Dulloo, A.G.; Geissler, C.A.; Horton, T.; Collins, A.; Miller, D.S. Normal caffeine consumption: Influence on thermogenesis and
      daily energy expenditure in lean and postobese human volunteers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1989, 49, 44–50. [CrossRef]
26.   Greer, F.; Hudson, R.; Ross, R.; Graham, T. Caffeine ingestion decreases glucose disposal during a hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic
      clamp in sedentary humans. Diabetes 2001, 50, 2349–2354. [CrossRef]
27.   MacKenzie, T.; Comi, R.; Sluss, P.; Keisari, R.; Manwar, S.; Kim, J.; Larson, R.; Baron, J.A. Metabolic and hormonal effects of
      caffeine: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial. Metabolism 2007, 56, 1694–1698. [CrossRef]
28.   Moisey, L.L.; Kacker, S.; Bickerton, A.C.; Robinson, L.E.; Graham, T.E. Caffeinated coffee consumption impairs blood glucose
      homeostasis in response to high and low glycemic index meals in healthy men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 87, 1254–1261. [CrossRef]
29.   Gavrieli, A.; Karfopoulou, E.; Kardatou, E.; Spyreli, E.; Fragopoulou, E.; Mantzoros, C.S.; Yannakoulia, M. Effect of different
      amounts of coffee on dietary intake and appetite of normal-weight and overweight/obese individuals. Obesity 2013, 21, 1127–1132.
      [CrossRef]
30.   Rakvaag, E.; Dragsted, L.O. Acute effects of light and dark roasted coffee on glucose tolerance: A randomized, controlled
      crossover trial in healthy volunteers. Eur. J. Nutr. 2016, 55, 2221–2230. [CrossRef]
31.   Robertson, T.M.; Clifford, M.N.; Penson, S.; Chope, G.; Robertson, M.D. A single serving of caffeinated coffee impairs postprandial
      glucose metabolism in overweight men. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 114, 1218–1225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Shi, X.; Xue, W.; Liang, S.; Zhao, J.; Zhang, X. Acute caffeine ingestion reduces insulin sensitivity in healthy subjects: A systematic
      review and meta-analysis. Nutr. J. 2016, 15, 103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Alperet, D.J.; Rebello, S.A.; Khoo, E.Y.; Tay, Z.; Seah, S.S.; Tai, B.C.; Tai, E.S.; Emady-Azar, S.; Chou, C.J.; Darimont, C.; et al.
      The effect of coffee consumption on insulin sensitivity and other biological risk factors for type 2 diabetes: A randomized
      placebo-controlled trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2020, 111, 448–458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.   Ohnaka, K.; Ikeda, M.; Maki, T.; Okada, T.; Shimazoe, T.; Adachi, M.; Nomura, M.; Takayanagi, R.; Kono, S. Effects of 16-week
      consumption of caffeinated and decaffeinated instant coffee on glucose metabolism in a randomized controlled trial. J. Nutr.
      Metab. 2012, 2012, 207426. [CrossRef]
35.   Wedick, N.M.; Brennan, A.M.; Sun, Q.; Hu, F.B.; Mantzoros, C.S.; van Dam, R.M. Effects of caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee
      on biological risk factors for type 2 diabetes: A randomized controlled trial. Nutr. J. 2011, 10, 93. [CrossRef]
36.   Tuomilehto, J. Nonpharmacologic therapy and exercise in the prevention of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009, 32 (Suppl. 2),
      S189–S193. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                            13 of 17



37.   Ding, M.; Bhupathiraju, S.N.; Chen, M.; van Dam, R.M.; Hu, F.B. Caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee consumption and risk of
      type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and a dose-response meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2014, 37, 569–586. [CrossRef]
38.   McCusker, R.R.; Fuehrlein, B.; Goldberger, B.A.; Gold, M.S.; Cone, E.J. Caffeine content of decaffeinated coffee. J. Anal. Toxicol.
      2006, 30, 611–613. [CrossRef]
39.   Battram, D.S.; Arthur, R.; Weekes, A.; Graham, T.E. The glucose intolerance induced by caffeinated coffee ingestion is less
      pronounced than that due to alkaloid caffeine in men. J. Nutr. 2006, 136, 1276–1280. [CrossRef]
40.   Lecoultre, V.; Carrel, G.; Egli, L.; Binnert, C.; Boss, A.; MacMillan, E.L.; Kreis, R.; Boesch, C.; Darimont, C.; Tappy, L. Coffee
      consumption attenuates short-term fructose-induced liver insulin resistance in healthy men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 268–275.
      [CrossRef]
41.   Johnston, K.L.; Clifford, M.N.; Morgan, L.M. Coffee acutely modifies gastrointestinal hormone secretion and glucose tolerance in
      humans: Glycemic effects of chlorogenic acid and caffeine. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003, 78, 728–733. [CrossRef]
42.   Van Dijk, A.E.; Olthof, M.R.; Meeuse, J.C.; Seebus, E.; Heine, R.J.; van Dam, R.M. Acute effects of decaffeinated coffee and the
      major coffee components chlorogenic acid and trigonelline on glucose tolerance. Diabetes Care 2009, 32, 1023–1025. [CrossRef]
43.   Reis, C.E.G.; Paiva, C.L.R.D.; Amato, A.A.; Lofrano-Porto, A.; Wassell, S.; Bluck, L.J.C.; Dorea, J.G.; da Costa, T.H.M. Decaffeinated
      coffee improves insulin sensitivity in healthy men. Br. J. Nutr. 2018, 119, 1029–1038. [CrossRef]
44.   Wong, T.H.T.; Wan, J.M.F.; Tse, I.M.Y.; Sit, W.H.; Louie, J.C.Y. Consuming decaffeinated coffee with milk and sugar added before a
      high-glycaemic index meal improves postprandial glycaemic and insulinaemic responses in healthy adults. Br. J. Nutr. 2020, 124,
      785–796. [CrossRef]
45.   Olthof, M.R.; van Dijk, A.E.; Deacon, C.F.; Heine, R.J.; van Dam, R.M. Acute effects of decaffeinated coffee and the major coffee
      components chlorogenic acid and trigonelline on incretin hormones. Nutr. Metab. 2011, 8, 10. [CrossRef]
46.   Greenberg, J.A.; Owen, D.R.; Geliebter, A. Decaffeinated coffee and glucose metabolism in young men. Diabetes Care 2010, 33,
      278–280. [CrossRef]
47.   Hang, D.; Zeleznik, O.A.; He, X.; Guasch-Ferre, M.; Jiang, X.; Li, J.; Liang, L.; Eliassen, A.H.; Clish, C.B.; Chan, A.T.; et al.
      Metabolomic Signatures of Long-term Coffee Consumption and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes in Women. Diabetes Care 2020, 43,
      2588–2596. [CrossRef]
48.   Kuang, A.; Erlund, I.; Herder, C.; Westerhuis, J.A.; Tuomilehto, J.; Cornelis, M.C. Lipidomic Response to Coffee Consumption.
      Nutrients 2018, 10, 1851. [CrossRef]
49.   Favari, C.; Righetti, L.; Tassotti, M.; Gethings, L.A.; Martini, D.; Rosi, A.; Antonini, M.; Rubert, J.; Manach, C.; Dei, C.A.; et al.
      Metabolomic Changes after Coffee Consumption: New Paths on the Block. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2021, 65, e2000875. [CrossRef]
50.   Cornelis, M.C.; Erlund, I.; Michelotti, G.A.; Herder, C.; Westerhuis, J.A.; Tuomilehto, J. Metabolomic response to coffee consump-
      tion: Application to a three-stage clinical trial. J. Intern. Med. 2018, 283, 544–557. [CrossRef]
51.   Kuang, A.; Erlund, I.; Herder, C.; Westerhuis, J.A.; Tuomilehto, J.; Cornelis, M.C. Targeted proteomic response to coffee
      consumption. Eur. J. Nutr. 2020, 59, 1529–1539. [CrossRef]
52.   Seow, W.J.; Low, D.Y.; Pan, W.C.; Gunther, S.H.; Sim, X.; Torta, F.; Herr, D.R.; Kovalik, J.P.; Ching, J.; Khoo, C.M.; et al. Coffee,
      Black Tea, and Green Tea Consumption in Relation to Plasma Metabolites in an Asian Population. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2020,
      e2000527. [CrossRef]
53.   Karadas, O.; Mese, G.; Ozcivici, E. Cytotoxic Tolerance of Healthy and Cancerous Bone Cells to Anti-microbial Phenolic
      Compounds Depend on Culture Conditions. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2019, 188, 514–526. [CrossRef]
54.   Costea, T.; Nagy, P.; Ganea, C.; Szollosi, J.; Mocanu, M.M. Molecular Mechanisms and Bioavailability of Polyphenols in Prostate
      Cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 1062. [CrossRef]
55.   Kobayashi, H.; Murata, M.; Kawanishi, S.; Oikawa, S. Polyphenols with Anti-Amyloid beta Aggregation Show Potential Risk of
      Toxicity Via Pro-Oxidant Properties. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 3561. [CrossRef]
56.   Olson, K.R.; Briggs, A.; Devireddy, M.; Iovino, N.A.; Skora, N.C.; Whelan, J.; Villa, B.P.; Yuan, X.; Mannam, V.; Howard, S.;
      et al. Green tea polyphenolic antioxidants oxidize hydrogen sulfide to thiosulfate and polysulfides: A possible new mechanism
      underpinning their biological action. Redox Biol. 2020, 37, 101731. [CrossRef]
57.   Murakami, A. Dose-dependent functionality and toxicity of green tea polyphenols in experimental rodents. Arch. Biochem.
      Biophys. 2014, 557, 3–10. [CrossRef]
58.   Oketch-Rabah, H.A.; Roe, A.L.; Rider, C.V.; Bonkovsky, H.L.; Giancaspro, G.I.; Navarro, V.; Paine, M.F.; Betz, J.M.; Marles, R.J.;
      Casper, S.; et al. United States Pharmacopeia (USP) comprehensive review of the hepatotoxicity of green tea extracts. Toxicol. Rep.
      2020, 7, 386–402. [CrossRef]
59.   Leon-Gonzalez, A.J.; Auger, C.; Schini-Kerth, V.B. Pro-oxidant activity of polyphenols and its implication on cancer chemopreven-
      tion and chemotherapy. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2015, 98, 371–380. [CrossRef]
60.   Shaito, A.; Posadino, A.M.; Younes, N.; Hasan, H.; Halabi, S.; Alhababi, D.; Al-Mohannadi, A.; Abdel-Rahman, W.M.; Eid, A.H.;
      Nasrallah, G.K.; et al. Potential Adverse Effects of Resveratrol: A Literature Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 2084. [CrossRef]
61.   Tong, R.; Wu, X.; Liu, Y.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, J.; Jiang, X.; Zhang, L.; He, X.; Ma, L. Curcumin-Induced DNA Demethylation in
      Human Gastric Cancer Cells Is Mediated by the DNA-Damage Response Pathway. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2020, 2020, 2543504.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.   Lotito, S.B.; Frei, B. Consumption of flavonoid-rich foods and increased plasma antioxidant capacity in humans: Cause,
      consequence, or epiphenomenon? Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2006, 41, 1727–1746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                                14 of 17



63.   Lang, R.; Dieminger, N.; Beusch, A.; Lee, Y.M.; Dunkel, A.; Suess, B.; Skurk, T.; Wahl, A.; Hauner, H.; Hofmann, T. Bioappearance
      and pharmacokinetics of bioactives upon coffee consumption. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2013, 405, 8487–8503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.   EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources Added to Food (ANS). Scientific opinion on the safety of green tea catechins.
      EFSA J. 2018, 16, 5239–5328.
65.   EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nitrition and Allergies NDA. Scientific Opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA J. 2015, 13,
      4102–4222.
66.   Kempf, K.; Kolb, H.; Gartner, B.; Bytof, G.; Stiebitz, H.; Lantz, I.; Lang, R.; Hofmann, T.; Martin, S. Cardiometabolic effects of two
      coffee blends differing in content for major constituents in overweight adults: A randomized controlled trial. Eur. J. Nutr. 2015,
      54, 845–854. [CrossRef]
67.   Ludwig, I.A.; Clifford, M.N.; Lean, M.E.; Ashihara, H.; Crozier, A. Coffee: Biochemistry and potential impact on health. Food
      Funct. 2014, 5, 1695–1717. [CrossRef]
68.   Murakami, A.; Ohnishi, K. Target molecules of food phytochemicals: Food science bound for the next dimension. Food Funct.
      2012, 3, 462–476. [CrossRef]
69.   Sirota, R.; Gibson, D.; Kohen, R. The role of the catecholic and the electrophilic moieties of caffeic acid in Nrf2/Keap1 pathway
      activation in ovarian carcinoma cell lines. Redox Biol. 2015, 4, 48–59. [CrossRef]
70.   Wei, M.; Zheng, Z.; Shi, L.; Jin, Y.; Ji, L. Natural Polyphenol Chlorogenic Acid Protects Against Acetaminophen-Induced
      Hepatotoxicity by Activating ERK/Nrf2 Antioxidative Pathway. Toxicol. Sci. 2018, 162, 99–112. [CrossRef]
71.   Liang, N.; Dupuis, J.H.; Yada, R.Y.; Kitts, D.D. Chlorogenic acid isomers directly interact with Keap 1-Nrf2 signaling in Caco-2
      cells. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2019, 457, 105–118. [CrossRef]
72.   Ciolino, H.P.; Daschner, P.J.; Yeh, G.C. Dietary flavonols quercetin and kaempferol are ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
      that affect CYP1A1 transcription differentially. Biochem. J. 1999, 340 Pt 3, 715–722. [CrossRef]
73.   Kalthoff, S.; Ehmer, U.; Freiberg, N.; Manns, M.P.; Strassburg, C.P. Coffee induces expression of glucuronosyltransferases by the
      aryl hydrocarbon receptor and Nrf2 in liver and stomach. Gastroenterology 2010, 139, 1699–1710.e2. [CrossRef]
74.   Ishikawa, T.; Takahashi, S.; Morita, K.; Okinaga, H.; Teramoto, T. Induction of AhR-mediated gene transcription by coffee. PLoS
      ONE 2014, 9, e102152. [CrossRef]
75.   Safe, S.; Jin, U.H.; Park, H.; Chapkin, R.S.; Jayaraman, A. Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR) Ligands as Selective AHR Modulators
      (SAhRMs). Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 6654. [CrossRef]
76.   Altieri, F.; Cairone, F.; Giamogante, F.; Carradori, S.; Locatelli, M.; Chichiarelli, S.; Cesa, S. Influence of Ellagitannins Extracted by
      Pomegranate Fruit on Disulfide Isomerase PDIA3 Activity. Nutrients 2019, 11, 186. [CrossRef]
77.   Islam, B.; Sharma, C.; Adem, A.; Aburawi, E.; Ojha, S. Insight into the mechanism of polyphenols on the activity of HMGR by
      molecular docking. Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 2015, 9, 4943–4951.
78.   Liu, G.; Shi, A.; Wang, N.; Li, M.; He, X.; Yin, C.; Tu, Q.; Shen, X.; Tao, Y.; Wang, Q.; et al. Polyphenolic Proanthocyanidin-B2
      suppresses proliferation of liver cancer cells and hepatocellular carcinogenesis through directly binding and inhibiting AKT
      activity. Redox Biol. 2020, 37, 101701. [CrossRef]
79.   Vachali, P.P.; Li, B.; Besch, B.M.; Bernstein, P.S. Protein-Flavonoid Interaction Studies by a Taylor Dispersion Surface Plasmon
      Resonance (SPR) Technique: A Novel Method to Assess Biomolecular Interactions. Biosensors 2016, 6, 6. [CrossRef]
80.   Hu, W.H.; Dai, D.K.; Zheng, B.Z.; Duan, R.; Dong, T.T.; Qin, Q.W.; Tsim, K.W. Piceatannol, a Natural Analog of Resveratrol, Exerts
      Anti-angiogenic Efficiencies by Blockage of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Binding to Its Receptor. Molecules 2020, 25, 3769.
      [CrossRef]
81.   Aranaz, P.; Navarro-Herrera, D.; Zabala, M.; Migueliz, I.; Romo-Hualde, A.; Lopez-Yoldi, M.; Martinez, J.A.; Vizmanos, J.L.;
      Milagro, F.I.; Gonzalez-Navarro, C.J. Phenolic Compounds Inhibit 3T3-L1 Adipogenesis Depending on the Stage of Differentiation
      and Their Binding Affinity to PPARgamma. Molecules 2019, 24, 1045. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.   Wang, D.; Ho, L.; Faith, J.; Ono, K.; Janle, E.M.; Lachcik, P.J.; Cooper, B.R.; Jannasch, A.H.; D’Arcy, B.R.; Williams, B.A.; et al.
      Role of intestinal microbiota in the generation of polyphenol-derived phenolic acid mediated attenuation of Alzheimer’s disease
      beta-amyloid oligomerization. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2015, 59, 1025–1040. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.   Dubey, R.; Patil, K.; Dantu, S.C.; Sardesai, D.M.; Bhatia, P.; Malik, N.; Acharya, J.D.; Sarkar, S.; Ghosh, S.; Chakrabarti, R.; et al.
      Azadirachtin inhibits amyloid formation, disaggregates pre-formed fibrils and protects pancreatic beta-cells from human islet
      amyloid polypeptide/amylin-induced cytotoxicity. Biochem. J. 2019, 476, 889–907. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.   Jahic, A.; Tusek, Z.M.; Pintar, S.; Berbic, S.; Zerovnik, E. The effect of three polyphenols and some other antioxidant substances on
      amyloid fibril formation by Human cystatin C. Neurochem. Int. 2020, 140, 104806. [CrossRef]
85.   Araujo, A.R.; Reis, R.L.; Pires, R.A. Natural Polyphenols as Modulators of the Fibrillization of Islet Amyloid Polypeptide. Adv.
      Exp. Med. Biol. 2020, 1250, 159–176.
86.   Chaari, A. Inhibition of human islet amyloid polypeptide aggregation and cellular toxicity by oleuropein and derivatives from
      olive oil. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 162, 284–300. [CrossRef]
87.   Chaari, A.; Abdellatif, B.; Nabi, F.; Khan, R.H. Date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) fruit’s polyphenols as potential inhibitors for
      human amylin fibril formation and toxicity in type 2 diabetes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 164, 1794–1808. [CrossRef]
88.   Charlton, A.J.; Baxter, N.J.; Khan, M.L.; Moir, A.J.; Haslam, E.; Davies, A.P.; Williamson, M.P. Polyphenol/peptide binding and
      precipitation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2002, 50, 1593–1601. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                            15 of 17



89.  Sinisi, V.; Forzato, C.; Cefarin, N.; Navarini, L.; Berti, F. Interaction of chlorogenic acids and quinides from coffee with human
     serum albumin. Food Chem. 2015, 168, 332–340. [CrossRef]
90. Berti, F.; Navarini, L.; Guercia, E.; Oreski, A.; Gasparini, A.; Scoltock, J.; Forzato, C. Interaction of the Coffee Diterpenes Cafestol
     and 16-O-Methyl-Cafestol Palmitates with Serum Albumins. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1823. [CrossRef]
91. Tung, W.C.; Rizzo, B.; Dabbagh, Y.; Saraswat, S.; Romanczyk, M.; Codorniu-Hernandez, E.; Rebollido-Rios, R.; Needs, P.W.;
     Kroon, P.A.; Rakotomanomana, N.; et al. Polyphenols bind to low density lipoprotein at biologically relevant concentrations that
     are protective for heart disease. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2020, 694, 108589. [CrossRef]
92. Kolb, H.; Kempf, K.; Martin, S. Health Effects of Coffee: Mechanism Unraveled? Nutrients 2020, 12, 1842. [CrossRef]
93. Shao, B.; Mao, L.; Shao, J.; Huang, C.H.; Qin, L.; Huang, R.; Sheng, Z.G.; Cao, D.; Zhang, Z.Q.; Lin, L.; et al. Mechanism of
     synergistic DNA damage induced by caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) and Cu(II): Competitive binding between CAPE and
     DNA with Cu(II)/Cu(I). Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2020, 159, 107–118. [CrossRef]
94. Wang, Z.; Zhai, X.; Sun, Y.; Yin, C.; Yang, E.; Wang, W.; Sun, D. Antibacterial activity of chlorogenic acid-loaded SiO2 nanoparticles
     caused by accumulation of reactive oxygen species. Nanotechnology 2020, 31, 185101. [CrossRef]
95. Kanner, J. Polyphenols by Generating H2O2, Affect Cell Redox Signaling, Inhibit PTPs and Activate Nrf2 Axis for Adaptation
     and Cell Surviving: In Vitro, In Vivo and Human Health. Antioxidants 2020, 9, 797. [CrossRef]
96. Labbadia, J.; Brielmann, R.M.; Neto, M.F.; Lin, Y.F.; Haynes, C.M.; Morimoto, R.I. Mitochondrial Stress Restores the Heat Shock
     Response and Prevents Proteostasis Collapse during Aging. Cell Rep. 2017, 21, 1481–1494. [CrossRef]
97. Boncler, M.; Golanski, J.; Lukasiak, M.; Redzynia, M.; Dastych, J.; Watala, C. A new approach for the assessment of the toxicity of
     polyphenol-rich compounds with the use of high content screening analysis. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0180022. [CrossRef]
98. Franco, R.; Navarro, G.; Martinez-Pinilla, E. Hormetic and Mitochondria-Related Mechanisms of Antioxidant Action of Phyto-
     chemicals. Antioxidants 2019, 8, 373. [CrossRef]
99. Calabrese, V.; Cornelius, C.; Dinkova-Kostova, A.T.; Iavicoli, I.; Di, P.R.; Koverech, A.; Cuzzocrea, S.; Rizzarelli, E.; Calabrese,
     E.J. Cellular stress responses, hormetic phytochemicals and vitagenes in aging and longevity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2012, 1822,
     753–783. [CrossRef]
100. Naoi, M.; Wu, Y.; Shamoto-Nagai, M.; Maruyama, W. Mitochondria in Neuroprotection by Phytochemicals: Bioactive Polyphenols
     Modulate Mitochondrial Apoptosis System, Function and Structure. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 2451. [CrossRef]
101. Rothhammer, V.; Quintana, F.J. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: An environmental sensor integrating immune responses in health
     and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2019, 19, 184–197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Kalthoff, S.; Ehmer, U.; Freiberg, N.; Manns, M.P.; Strassburg, C.P. Interaction between oxidative stress sensor Nrf2 and xenobiotic-
     activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor in the regulation of the human phase II detoxifying UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A10. J.
     Biol. Chem. 2010, 285, 5993–6002. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Kohle, C.; Bock, K.W. Coordinate regulation of Phase I and II xenobiotic metabolisms by the Ah receptor and Nrf2. Biochem.
     Pharmacol. 2007, 73, 1853–1862. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Grahame, H.D. AMP-activated protein kinase: A key regulator of energy balance with many roles in human disease. J. Intern.
     Med. 2014, 276, 543–559. [CrossRef]
105. Salminen, A.; Kauppinen, A.; Kaarniranta, K. AMPK/Snf1 signaling regulates histone acetylation: Impact on gene expression
     and epigenetic functions. Cell Signal. 2016, 28, 887–895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Iside, C.; Scafuro, M.; Nebbioso, A.; Altucci, L. SIRT1 Activation by Natural Phytochemicals: An Overview. Front. Pharmacol.
     2020, 11, 1225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Lei, L.; Chai, Y.; Lin, H.; Chen, C.; Zhao, M.; Xiong, W.; Zhuang, J.; Fan, X. Dihydroquercetin Activates AMPK/Nrf2/HO-1
     Signaling in Macrophages and Attenuates Inflammation in LPS-Induced Endotoxemic Mice. Front. Pharmacol. 2020, 11, 662.
     [CrossRef]
108. Boettler, U.; Sommerfeld, K.; Volz, N.; Pahlke, G.; Teller, N.; Somoza, V.; Lang, R.; Hofmann, T.; Marko, D. Coffee constituents
     as modulators of Nrf2 nuclear translocation and ARE (EpRE)-dependent gene expression. J. Nutr. Biochem. 2011, 22, 426–440.
     [CrossRef]
109. Shi, A.; Shi, H.; Wang, Y.; Liu, X.; Cheng, Y.; Li, H.; Zhao, H.; Wang, S.; Dong, L. Activation of Nrf2 pathway and inhibition of
     NLRP3 inflammasome activation contribute to the protective effect of chlorogenic acid on acute liver injury. Int. Immunopharmacol.
     2018, 54, 125–130. [CrossRef]
110. Fratantonio, D.; Speciale, A.; Canali, R.; Natarelli, L.; Ferrari, D.; Saija, A.; Virgili, F.; Cimino, F. Low nanomolar caffeic
     acid attenuates high glucose-induced endothelial dysfunction in primary human umbilical-vein endothelial cells by affecting
     NF-kappaB and Nrf2 pathways. Biofactors 2017, 43, 54–62. [CrossRef]
111. Sauer, T.; Raithel, M.; Kressel, J.; Munch, G.; Pischetsrieder, M. Activation of the transcription factor Nrf2 in macrophages, Caco-2
     cells and intact human gut tissue by Maillard reaction products and coffee. Amino Acids 2013, 44, 1427–1439. [CrossRef]
112. Balstad, T.R.; Carlsen, H.; Myhrstad, M.C.; Kolberg, M.; Reiersen, H.; Gilen, L.; Ebihara, K.; Paur, I.; Blomhoff, R. Coffee,
     broccoli and spices are strong inducers of electrophile response element-dependent transcription in vitro and in vivo—Studies in
     electrophile response element transgenic mice. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2011, 55, 185–197. [CrossRef]
113. Higgins, L.G.; Cavin, C.; Itoh, K.; Yamamoto, M.; Hayes, J.D. Induction of cancer chemopreventive enzymes by coffee is mediated
     by transcription factor Nrf2. Evidence that the coffee-specific diterpenes cafestol and kahweol confer protection against acrolein.
     Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2008, 226, 328–337. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                                  16 of 17



114. Ren, Y.; Wang, C.; Xu, J.; Wang, S. Cafestol and Kahweol: A Review on Their Bioactivities and Pharmacological Properties. Int. J.
     Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 4238. [CrossRef]
115. Fouzder, C.; Mukhuty, A.; Mukherjee, S.; Malick, C.; Kundu, R. Trigonelline inhibits Nrf2 via EGFR signalling pathway and
     augments efficacy of Cisplatin and Etoposide in NSCLC cells. Toxicol. Vitro 2021, 70, 105038. [CrossRef]
116. Boettler, U.; Volz, N.; Pahlke, G.; Teller, N.; Kotyczka, C.; Somoza, V.; Stiebitz, H.; Bytof, G.; Lantz, I.; Lang, R.; et al. Coffees rich
     in chlorogenic acid or N-methylpyridinium induce chemopreventive phase II-enzymes via the Nrf2/ARE pathway in vitro and
     in vivo. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2011, 55, 798–802. [CrossRef]
117. Zamora-Ros, R.; Rothwell, J.A.; Scalbert, A.; Knaze, V.; Romieu, I.; Slimani, N.; Fagherazzi, G.; Perquier, F.; Touillaud, M.;
     Molina-Montes, E.; et al. Dietary intakes and food sources of phenolic acids in the European Prospective Investigation into
     Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 110, 1500–1511. [CrossRef]
118. Taguchi, C.; Fukushima, Y.; Kishimoto, Y.; Suzuki-Sugihara, N.; Saita, E.; Takahashi, Y.; Kondo, K. Estimated Dietary Polyphenol
     Intake and Major Food and Beverage Sources among Elderly Japanese. Nutrients 2015, 7, 10269–10281. [CrossRef]
119. Zamora-Ros, R.; Knaze, V.; Rothwell, J.A.; Hemon, B.; Moskal, A.; Overvad, K.; Tjonneland, A.; Kyro, C.; Fagherazzi, G.;
     Boutron-Ruault, M.C.; et al. Dietary polyphenol intake in Europe: The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
     Nutrition (EPIC) study. Eur. J. Nutr. 2016, 55, 1359–1375. [CrossRef]
120. Cavin, C.; Marin-Kuan, M.; Langouet, S.; Bezencon, C.; Guignard, G.; Verguet, C.; Piguet, D.; Holzhauser, D.; Cornaz, R.; Schilter,
     B. Induction of Nrf2-mediated cellular defenses and alteration of phase I activities as mechanisms of chemoprotective effects of
     coffee in the liver. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2008, 46, 1239–1248. [CrossRef]
121. Paur, I.; Balstad, T.R.; Blomhoff, R. Degree of roasting is the main determinant of the effects of coffee on NF-kappaB and EpRE.
     Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010, 48, 1218–1227. [CrossRef]
122. Salomone, F.; Li, V.G.; Vitaglione, P.; Morisco, F.; Fogliano, V.; Zappala, A.; Palmigiano, A.; Garozzo, D.; Caporaso, N.; D’Argenio,
     G.; et al. Coffee enhances the expression of chaperones and antioxidant proteins in rats with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
     Transl. Res. 2014, 163, 593–602. [CrossRef]
123. Vicente, S.J.; Ishimoto, E.Y.; Torres, E.A. Coffee modulates transcription factor Nrf2 and highly increases the activity of antioxidant
     enzymes in rats. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 116–122. [CrossRef]
124. Volz, N.; Boettler, U.; Winkler, S.; Teller, N.; Schwarz, C.; Bakuradze, T.; Eisenbrand, G.; Haupt, L.; Griffiths, L.R.; Stiebitz, H.; et al.
     Effect of coffee combining green coffee bean constituents with typical roasting products on the Nrf2/ARE pathway in vitro and
     in vivo. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 60, 9631–9641. [CrossRef]
125. Priftis, A.; Angeli-Terzidou, A.E.; Veskoukis, A.S.; Spandidos, D.A.; Kouretas, D. Cellspecific and roastingdependent regulation
     of the Keap1/Nrf2 pathway by coffee extracts. Mol. Med. Rep. 2018, 17, 8325–8331. [PubMed]
126. Salomone, F.; Galvano, F.; Li, V.G. Molecular Bases Underlying the Hepatoprotective Effects of Coffee. Nutrients 2017, 9, 85.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Alferink, L.J.M.; Kiefte-de Jong, J.C.; Darwish, M.S. Potential Mechanisms Underlying the Role of Coffee in Liver Health. Semin.
     Liver Dis. 2018, 38, 193–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Farias-Pereira, R.; Park, C.S.; Park, Y. Mechanisms of action of coffee bioactive components on lipid metabolism. Food Sci.
     Biotechnol. 2019, 28, 1287–1296. [CrossRef]
129. Meex, R.C.R.; Blaak, E.E. Mitochondrial Dysfunction is a Key Pathway that Links Saturated Fat Intake to the Development and
     Progression of NAFLD. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2021, 65, e1900942. [CrossRef]
130. Brandt, A.; Nier, A.; Jin, C.J.; Baumann, A.; Jung, F.; Ribas, V.; Garcia-Ruiz, C.; Fernandez-Checa, J.C.; Bergheim, I. Consumption
     of decaffeinated coffee protects against the development of early non-alcoholic steatohepatitis: Role of intestinal barrier function.
     Redox Biol. 2019, 21, 101092. [CrossRef]
131. Vitaglione, P.; Mazzone, G.; Lembo, V.; D’Argenio, G.; Rossi, A.; Guido, M.; Savoia, M.; Salomone, F.; Mennella, I.; De, F.F.; et al.
     Coffee prevents fatty liver disease induced by a high-fat diet by modulating pathways of the gut-liver axis. J. Nutr. Sci. 2019, 8,
     e15. [CrossRef]
132. Chen, Y.P.; Lu, F.B.; Hu, Y.B.; Xu, L.M.; Zheng, M.H.; Hu, E.D. A systematic review and a dose-response meta-analysis of coffee
     dose and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin. Nutr. 2019, 38, 2552–2557. [CrossRef]
133. Hayat, U.; Siddiqui, A.A.; Okut, H.; Afroz, S.; Tasleem, S.; Haris, A. The effect of coffee consumption on the non-alcoholic fatty
     liver disease and liver fibrosis: A meta-analysis of 11 epidemiological studies. Ann. Hepatol. 2021, 20, 100254. [CrossRef]
134. Weir, G.C.; Gaglia, J.; Bonner-Weir, S. Inadequate beta-cell mass is essential for the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Lancet Diabetes
     Endocrinol. 2020, 8, 249–256. [CrossRef]
135. Esser, N.; Utzschneider, K.M.; Kahn, S.E. Early beta cell dysfunction vs insulin hypersecretion as the primary event in the
     pathogenesis of dysglycaemia. Diabetologia 2020, 63, 2007–2021. [CrossRef]
136. Kolb, H.; Stumvoll, M.; Kramer, W.; Kempf, K.; Martin, S. Insulin translates unfavourable lifestyle into obesity. BMC Med. 2018,
     16, 232. [CrossRef]
137. Marselli, L.; Piron, A.; Suleiman, M.; Colli, M.L.; Yi, X.; Khamis, A.; Carrat, G.R.; Rutter, G.A.; Bugliani, M.; Giusti, L.; et al.
     Persistent or Transient Human beta Cell Dysfunction Induced by Metabolic Stress: Specific Signatures and Shared Gene Expression
     with Type 2 Diabetes. Cell Rep. 2020, 33, 108466. [CrossRef]
138. Taylor, R.; Al-Mrabeh, A.; Sattar, N. Understanding the mechanisms of reversal of type 2 diabetes. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
     2019, 7, 726–736. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2021, 13, 1144                                                                                                                  17 of 17



139. Accili, D.; Talchai, S.C.; Kim-Muller, J.Y.; Cinti, F.; Ishida, E.; Ordelheide, A.M.; Kuo, T.; Fan, J.; Son, J. When beta-cells fail: Lessons
     from dedifferentiation. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 2016, 18 (Suppl. 1), 117–122. [CrossRef]
140. Raleigh, D.; Zhang, X.; Hastoy, B.; Clark, A. The beta-cell assassin: IAPP cytotoxicity. J Mol Endocrinol 2017, 59, R121–R140.
     [CrossRef]
141. Arunagiri, A.; Haataja, L.; Pottekat, A.; Pamenan, F.; Kim, S.; Zeltser, L.M.; Paton, A.W.; Paton, J.C.; Tsai, B.; Itkin-Ansari, P.; et al.
     Proinsulin misfolding is an early event in the progression to type 2 diabetes. Elife 2019, 8, e44532. [CrossRef]
142. Carrasco-Pozo, C.; Tan, K.N.; Gotteland, M.; Borges, K. Sulforaphane Protects against High Cholesterol-Induced Mitochondrial
     Bioenergetics Impairments, Inflammation, and Oxidative Stress and Preserves Pancreatic beta-Cells Function. Oxid. Med. Cell.
     Longev. 2017, 2017, 3839756. [CrossRef]
143. Li, C.G.; Ni, C.L.; Yang, M.; Tang, Y.Z.; Li, Z.; Zhu, Y.J.; Jiang, Z.H.; Sun, B.; Li, C.J. Honokiol protects pancreatic beta cell
     against high glucose and intermittent hypoxia-induced injury by activating Nrf2/ARE pathway in vitro and in vivo. Biomed.
     Pharmacother. 2018, 97, 1229–1237. [CrossRef]
144. Schultheis, J.; Beckmann, D.; Mulac, D.; Muller, L.; Esselen, M.; Dufer, M. Nrf2 Activation Protects Mouse Beta Cells from
     Glucolipotoxicity by Restoring Mitochondrial Function and Physiological Redox Balance. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2019, 2019,
     7518510. [CrossRef]
145. Moens, C.; Bensellam, M.; Himpe, E.; Muller, C.J.F.; Jonas, J.C.; Bouwens, L. Aspalathin Protects Insulin-Producing beta Cells
     against Glucotoxicity and Oxidative Stress-Induced Cell Death. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2020, 64, e1901009. [CrossRef]
146. Ganesan, K.; Ramkumar, K.M.; Xu, B. Vitexin restores pancreatic beta-cell function and insulin signaling through Nrf2 and
     NF-kappaB signaling pathways. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 888, 173606. [CrossRef]
147. Baumel-Alterzon, S.; Katz, L.S.; Brill, G.; Garcia-Ocana, A.; Scott, D.K. Nrf2: The Master and Captain of Beta Cell Fate. Trends
     Endocrinol. Metab. 2021, 32, 7–19. [CrossRef]
148. Fu, J.; Zheng, H.; Wang, H.; Yang, B.; Zhao, R.; Lu, C.; Liu, Z.; Hou, Y.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, Q.; et al. Protective Role of Nuclear Factor
     E2-Related Factor 2 against Acute Oxidative Stress-Induced Pancreatic beta -Cell Damage. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2015, 2015,
     639191. [CrossRef]
149. Kumar, A.; Katz, L.S.; Schulz, A.M.; Kim, M.; Honig, L.B.; Li, L.; Davenport, B.; Homann, D.; Garcia-Ocana, A.; Herman, M.A.;
     et al. Activation of Nrf2 Is Required for Normal and ChREBPalpha-Augmented Glucose-Stimulated beta-Cell Proliferation.
     Diabetes 2018, 67, 1561–1575. [CrossRef]
150. Uruno, A.; Furusawa, Y.; Yagishita, Y.; Fukutomi, T.; Muramatsu, H.; Negishi, T.; Sugawara, A.; Kensler, T.W.; Yamamoto, M. The
     Keap1-Nrf2 system prevents onset of diabetes mellitus. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2013, 33, 2996–3010. [CrossRef]
151. Watanabe, S.; Takahashi, T.; Ogawa, H.; Uehara, H.; Tsunematsu, T.; Baba, H.; Morimoto, Y.; Tsuneyama, K. Daily Coffee Intake
     Inhibits Pancreatic Beta Cell Damage and Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis in a Mouse Model of Spontaneous Metabolic Syndrome,
     Tsumura-Suzuki Obese Diabetic Mice. Metab. Syndr. Relat. Disord. 2017, 15, 170–177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Ciaramelli, C.; Palmioli, A.; De, L.A.; Colombo, L.; Sala, G.; Riva, C.; Zoia, C.P.; Salmona, M.; Airoldi, C. NMR-driven identification
     of anti-amyloidogenic compounds in green and roasted coffee extracts. Food Chem. 2018, 252, 171–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Fukuyama, K.; Kakio, S.; Nakazawa, Y.; Kobata, K.; Funakoshi-Tago, M.; Suzuki, T.; Tamura, H. Roasted Coffee Reduces
     beta-Amyloid Production by Increasing Proteasomal beta-Secretase Degradation in Human Neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y Cells. Mol.
     Nutr. Food Res. 2018, 62, e1800238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Ishida, K.; Misawa, K.; Nishimura, H.; Hirata, T.; Yamamoto, M.; Ota, N. 5-Caffeoylquinic Acid Ameliorates Cognitive Decline
     and Reduces Abeta Deposition by Modulating Abeta Clearance Pathways in APP/PS2 Transgenic Mice. Nutrients 2020, 12, 494.
     [CrossRef]
155. Costes, S.; Langen, R.; Gurlo, T.; Matveyenko, A.V.; Butler, P.C. beta-Cell failure in type 2 diabetes: A case of asking too much of
     too few? Diabetes 2013, 62, 327–335. [CrossRef]
156. Bakuradze, T.; Lang, R.; Hofmann, T.; Schipp, D.; Galan, J.; Eisenbrand, G.; Richling, E. Coffee consumption rapidly reduces
     background DNA strand breaks in healthy humans: Results of a short-term repeated uptake intervention study. Mol. Nutr. Food
     Res. 2016, 60, 682–686. [CrossRef]
157. Kotyczka, C.; Boettler, U.; Lang, R.; Stiebitz, H.; Bytof, G.; Lantz, I.; Hofmann, T.; Marko, D.; Somoza, V. Dark roast coffee is more
     effective than light roast coffee in reducing body weight, and in restoring red blood cell vitamin E and glutathione concentrations
     in healthy volunteers. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2011, 55, 1582–1586. [CrossRef]
