                                                   Proofing your Book Chapter




The following contains the PDF proof of your book chapter for you to review. Please follow
                          the steps below to proof your chapter.


1. Read through your chapter carefully
      Remember to check that:
              special characters appear correctly, especially in equations
              Figures and Tables are correct
              headings and sub-headings are placed correctly
      Our staff will not read through your chapter in detail once you have returned it, so please make sure you have
       checked everything. Final responsibility for content lies with the author.
      As no revised proofs will be provided, please ensure all required corrections are indicated at this stage.

2. Mark up any corrections that are required
      Please only correct scientific or grammatical errors in your chapter – do not rewrite sections or make
       minor cosmetic changes at this stage.
      Please use the annotation tools to mark up corrections on the PDF proof – further instructions can be found
       on the following page.
      Please do not edit the PDF directly or send a list of corrections.
      If any replacement figures are required, please resupply the file at the highest possible resolution.
      Please only supply new versions of figures if you have been requested to do so, or you need to supply a
       corrected version.
      Permission statements for reproduced material may have been edited to meet the different requirements of the
       copyright holders. Please do not correct the formatting of these statements.

3. Make sure you have answered all author queries
      These are listed before the beginning of the chapter– click on the query number to jump to the relevant place
       in the text.
      Please put your responses in the text, not on the query page.

4. Return your corrected proof to your editor(s)
      Please email the annotated PDF of your chapter to afarah@nutricao.ufrj.br within ONE WEEK of receipt.
      Please do not return the PDF to Books Production, or to the email address from which you received the
       download link.

               If you have any queries, please do not hesitate to contact us at booksprod@rsc.org
                                How to Annotate your PDF Proof

  Note: The location and appearance of tools may vary depending on the software you are using
      to read your proof. We recommend using Adobe Acrobat Reader DC (as shown in the
                  screenshots below), which can be downloaded for free online.


The Comment function can be found in the right-hand sidebar, which should appear when you open your PDF.
Otherwise, click ‘Tools’ and then select ‘Comment’. This will make the Comment tools visible (shown below).

                                       Select the piece of text that you want to mark up, and then click on the
                                       relevant Tool button to add the mark up to the text.
                                       For the Insert, Replace, and Sticky Note tools, this will open up a Note in
                                       which you can add instructions, or the text to be replaced/inserted –
                                       otherwise, you can double-click on the mark-up to open this.
                                       For all tools, any instructions you’ve added will appear in the Comment
                                       sidebar – you can also double-click on this to change, add to or remove
                                       the instructions.


                      Replace                                                      Insert
   Use the Replace tool to indicate text that should              Use the Insert tool to provide new text.
                    be changed.




                       Delete                                                   Highlight
    Use the Delete tool to indicate text that needs            Use the Highlight tool to indicate formatting
             to be removed completely.                                       changes to text.


                                                       –




                   Sticky Note                                              Hints and tips
   Use the Sticky Note tool to respond to a query,
   or indicate a change that cannot be marked up                  Special characters can be pasted into
            using one of the tools above.                       corrections from the Character Map in your
                                                                             operating system.
                                                              Text can be made bold and italic using shortcut
                                                                          keys Ctrl+B and Ctrl+I.
                                                               If you have difficulty selecting all the text you
                                                               wish to correct, try holding down the Shift key
                                                                         and using the arrow keys.
                                  AUTHOR QUERY FORM

Book Title: Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications
Chapter: 18

AQ1       In the sentence beginning ‘Over the past two decades the alkaloid and some…’,
          please check the spelling of ‘hyperlipidemy’ and indicate the changes required.

AQ2       In the sentence beginning ‘Additionally, in different studies…’, please check the
          spelling of ‘antitumorogenic’ and indicate the changes required.

AQ3       In the sentence beginning ‘For more information on coffee effect…’ please indicate
          which chapter should be cited to replace ‘Chapter X’.

AQ4       The brackets appear to be unpaired in the entry of Table 18.1 “Non-obese type 2…”.
          Please check and indicate any changes that are required.

AQ5       In the sentence beginning ‘In the liver, feeding coffee…’, please check the spelling
          of ‘glucuronyltransferase’ and indicate the changes required.

AQ6       In the sentence beginning ‘Competitive binding assays showed’, a word or phrase
          appears to be missing after ‘compete’. Please check this carefully and indicate any
          changes required here.

AQ7       Please check that ref. 11, 51, 56, 65, 89, 97, 117 and 122 have been displayed
          correctly.
                                Abstract
The abstract for your chapter is reproduced below for your reference. Please
note that this will not appear in the final printed version of your chapter.




Epidemiological studies suggest that coffee drinking can reduce the risk of
a number of diseases. In the last two decades, trigonelline and a few deriv-
atives produced during roasting were found to contribute differently to cof-
fee bioactivity, especially to the effects related to blood glucose and lipids
regulation, among more recently investigated ones such as neuroprotection,
antifibrotic and hepatoprotective effects; antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and
anti-tumoral effects and gastroprotective effect. Trigonelline has also been
considered as a phytohormone candidate. The present chapter will briefly
review these findings.
                                                                                       1



                                                                                       5
    Chapter 18

    Potential Effects of Trigonelline                                                 10
    and Derivatives on Health
    Ana Carolina Vieira Porto and Adriana Farah*
                                                                                      15
    Núcleo de Pesquisa em Café Prof. Luiz Carlos Trugo, Laboratório de
    Química e Bioatividade de Alimentos, Instituto de Nutrição, Universidade
    Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 21941-902, Brazil
    *E-mail: afarah@nutricao.ufrj.br
                                                                                      20




    18.1 Introduction
                                                                                      25
    Although the pharmacological effects of trigonelline were already studied in
    fenugreek plant in the 1960s,1 in coffee, until the end of the 1990s, trigonel-
    line was limited to being a precursor of volatile compounds and nicotinic
    acid during the roasting process. Over the past two decades the alkaloid and
    some derivatives gained additional importance due to its potential involve-       30
    ment in the protective effect of coffee drinking against a number of diseases,
                                2–5
AQ1 including type 2 diabetes       and hyperlipidemy.6 Additionally, in different
    studies trigonelline exerted neuroprotective,2,7,8 antimicrobial, antitumoro-
          9                      10                      11
AQ2 genic and phytoestrogenic effects, among others. Although most of these
    studies have been performed in vitro or in animals, trigonelline and its main     35
    roasting derivatives were recently found to be partly absorbed and to enter
    the vascular system,12,13 increasing their health potential in humans.
       Two of trigonelline's roasting products, nicotinic acid and nicotin-
    amide, are forms of niacin or vitamin B3, participating as coenzymes NAD
                                                                                      40



    Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications
    Edited by Adriana Farah
    © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019                                             45
    Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org

                                                436
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                 437
(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADP (nicotinamide adenine                  1
dinucleotide phosphate) in various metabolic redox reactions involved in the
energy metabolism (glucose, amino acids and fatty acids) and tissue health.
Additionally, they contribute to the normal functioning of the nervous sys-
tem, amongst many other purposes. Deficiency of niacin causes pellagra,             5
a disease characterized by skin lesions and diarrhea, amongst other symp-
toms.14,15 In recent years, nicotinic acid gained additional functions other
than those intrinsic to its basic vitamin role, especially reducing blood levels
of low and very low density lipoproteins (LDL and VLDL, respectively) and
increasing those of high density lipoprotein (HDL).16,17                           10
  Most recently, the vasoprotective13 and hepatoprotective18 effects of
N-methylpyridinium, another roasting derivative, have been studied. The
present chapter will briefly review these findings.

                                                                                   15
18.2 Dietary Contribution
Human exposure to trigonelline occurs when plants containing trigonel-
line such as pumpkin, barley, cantaloupe, corn, onions, peas, soybeans,
tomatoes, lettuce, cabbage and coffee are consumed in the diet. Exposure
can also occur upon the consumption of herbal remedies.19,20 Although              20
the amount of solubles in coffee brew can change considerably with many
factors as explained early in this book, according to literature reports, one
cup of coffee may contain 40 to 530 mg 100 mL−1 of trigonelline13,21,22 in
addition to about 86 mg 100 mL−1 of N-methylpyridinium13 and 10 to 40
mg 100 mL−1 of nicotinic acid.13,21 While small amounts of trigonelline            25
and nicotinic acid are present in many foods other than coffee, the occur-
rence of N-methylpyridinium in our daily diet seems to be restricted to
roasted coffee.23,24
   Studies on the effects of trigonelline and the ion N-methylpyridinium on
health are recent and there are no estimates of daily intake needed to pro-        30
duce long-term beneficial effects. Additionally, the fact that most beneficial
effects of coffee are produced by the joint action of different bioactive com-
pounds makes it very difficult to build such estimates.
   Although nicotinic acid is present in various natural and processed foods,
coffee can be considered as a significant source of nicotinic acid in the diet.    35
Additionally, nicotinic acid from coffee matrix is considered to be highly
bioavailable.25 According to USDA,26 a 100 mL cup of a medium roast coffee
can supply approximately 6–18% of their daily dietary reference intake (DRI),
which is the same as for FAO-WHO27 (16 mg day−1 for men and 14 mg day−1
for women both from 14 to 70 years old). According to Teply and Prier,28 the       40
consumption of 3.5 standard cups of 100 mL per day accounts for about one-
third of the minimum dietary niacin requirement by the National Research
Council29 for adults (18 and 15 mg day−1 for men and women, respectively).
Considering the more recent range of values for nicotinic acid in coffee
beverage aforementioned, two 100 mL cups would be enough to cover the              45
USDA/FAO-WHO DRI26,27 values for both genders. In all cases, the amount of
438                                                                  Chapter 18
nicotinic acid in a cup varies with a number of factors as previously stated in     1
this book and this is just an estimate.
   Despite the high bioavailability of nicotinic acid from coffee,25 the biolog-
ical relevance of its intake through coffee has been questioned since, when
needed, niacin can also be synthesized from tryptophan (60 mg tryptophan            5
makes 1 mg niacin), which is abundant in the Western diet, including ani-
mal proteins, nuts and some other seeds.15 The intake through coffee was
thought to be more important in places where tryptophan intake is low, like
for example, rural and less developed areas of Central America and Central
Africa, since in these places corn (which is poor in tryptophan and niacin) is     10
the main source of energy.30–32 Confirming this hypothesis, in a study by Lang
et al.12 the levels of two of the main identified niacin metabolites (N-meth-
yl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide and N-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide) after
consumption of 350 mL of standard coffee were almost unaffected compared
to baseline concentrations. Soaking and cooking corn in alkali solution,           15
like lime water, seems to increase the bioavailability of niacin during maize
meal/flour production. For this reason, people who consume corn as torti-
llas or hominy are not at risk of niacin deficiency as are those who consume
untreated corn and corn flour as the main source of energy.30 Nevertheless,
supplementation with considerable amounts of nicotinic acid has been used          20
to decrease the LDL and VLDL levels16,17,33,34 and therefore an additional food
source of nicotinic acid is not harmful, especially considering that its excess
is not stored in the body.33,35

                                                                                   25
18.3 Metabolism
18.3.1 Trigonelline and N-Methylpyridinium
There are very few studies on the human metabolism of trigonelline and
N-methylpyridinium from coffee and most of them have been performed by             30
one group of researchers. There are also a few animal studies investigating
their metabolism in the form of isolated substance or in other food matrices
like pumpkin3 and seeds of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum), which are
good dietary sources of trigonelline.
   The results on the metabolism of trigonelline in rats and in humans are         35
not always compatible. In a study using rats, after acute oral administration
of 500 mg of trigonelline, the entire amount was recovered unchanged in
urine.36 On the other hand, upon acute oral administration of 4400 mg of
plain trigonelline to healthy adult female volunteers, approximately 20% of
the dose was excreted in the urine as intact trigonelline, and 9% as N-meth-       40
yl-2-pyridone-5-carboxylic acid.30 In another study, after coffee consumption,
trigonelline, N-methylpyridinium, N-methylnicotinamide, N-methyl-4-pyri-
done-5-carboxamide and N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (major metab-
olites of nicotinamide)37 were identified in human plasma.13
   Lang et al.38 evaluated in seven male and six female healthy adults the         45
plasma appearance and urinary metabolites excretion after consumption of
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                 439
350 mL of coffee containing trigonelline (809 µmol), nicotinic acid (25 µmol),      1
nicotinamide (585 nmol) and N-methylpyridinium (172 µmol). Trigonelline
and N-methylpyridinium were quickly absorbed into the circulation. Anal-
ysis of plasma collected from volunteers who did not consume coffee or
any coffee-containing food products for a washout period of at least 10 days        5
demonstrated that nicotinic acid and N-methylpyridinium present in coffee
and the metabolite N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxylic acid were not detect-
able in plasma when keeping a coffee-free diet. Starting with average initial
trigonelline plasma concentrations of about 160 nmol L−1, a rapid increase
was observed within the first 2–4 h after ingestion of the coffee brew. Maxi-      10
mum average plasma concentration (Cmax) found for trigonelline was higher
and was reached later (in about three hours) in the female when compared
to male volunteers. Urinary excretion of trigonelline within 8 h after coffee
consumption was equivalent to 57 ± 7% for men and 46 ± 7% for women.
Plasma levels steeply increased and reached maximum concentrations of              15
777 nmol L−1 (±14%) and 804 nmol L−1 (±29%), respectively, after 1.67 and
1.05 h, with small interindividual differences. N-methylpyridinium appeared
in plasma only after coffee consumption. The study showed that after coffee
consumption, N-methylpyridinium is rapidly absorbed by traversing the lipid
double layer of cell membranes despite its cationic nature, quickly entering       20
plasma, is systemically distributed, and then quickly excreted via urine. The
high plasma levels of N-methylpyridinium found after coffee consumption
demonstrated that this cation effectively enters the vascular system which is
a prerequisite for biological in vivo effects claimed for that compound such
as the induction of phase I/II detoxifying enzymes24 and the exhibition of         25
vasoprotective and hepatoprotective effects.39 Within the first 2 h after coffee
intervention, 23% and 29% of the ingested amounts of N-methylpyridinium
were already excreted in the urine of the female and male groups, respec-
tively. Eight hours after coffee ingestion, about 62% and 69% of N-methylpyr-
idinium, on average, were excreted via urine, respectively, thus leading to the    30
conclusion that renal excretion of N-methylpyridinium is strongly favored
compared to hepatic excretion.
   Still in the same study38 the niacin (nicotinic acid and nicotinamide)
metabolites N-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide and N-methyl-2-pyri-
done-5-carboxamide did not show significant changes in plasma concentra-           35
tion throughout the experiment. On the other hand, all subjects presented
nicotinamide (70–460 nmol L−1) in their plasma. Although the amount of 585
nmol of nicotinamide in the consumed coffee dosage was much smaller than
that of nicotinic acid, most subjects showed a response in the plasma levels
of nicotinamide. On the other hand, an increasing amount of nicotinic acid         40
was found to be excreted in urine 2 h after coffee ingestion, slowly approach-
ing a steady state after 6 h.
   In a study by Bakuradze et al.40 performed with 84 subjects, trigonelline
and N-methylpyridinium levels were significantly elevated in the urine of cof-
fee drinkers during four weeks of coffee consumption (three times a day).          45
N-methylpyridinium was not found in the urine of the control group who did
440                                                                    Chapter 18
not consume coffee in the same period. In the coffee drinkers, after a wash-          1
out period of four weeks N-methylpyridinium levels were back to below the
limit of quantification. Lang et al.12 reported similar results after acute coffee
consumption and observed elevated urinary levels of N-methylpyridinium
and trigonelline in coffee drinkers compared to non-coffee drinkers.                  5


18.3.2 Nicotinic Acid/Nicotinamide
The metabolism of nicotinic acid has been more extensively studied and its
fate well defined. A study published in 1949 had already reported N-meth-            10
yl-2-pyridone-5-carboxylic acid as a nicotinic acid plasma metabolite,41 the
same metabolite later reported for trigonelline.30
   After oral consumption, nicotinic acid is rapidly absorbed in the stom-
ach and intestine. Bechgaard and Jespersen42 studied the gastrointestinal
absorption of nicotinic acid in humans after instillation of 200 mg in the           15
empty stomach, in the stomach 30 min after a standard meal and in the
small intestine 30 min after a standard meal. During instillation into the
stomach, the maximum plasma nicotinic acid concentration occurred 10–20
min after administration. The highest level in plasma was found 5–10 min
after instillation into the upper small intestine. Eating while taking nicotinic     20
acid did not seem to influence its absorption. After instillation into the small
intestine, nicotinic acid appeared faster in the plasma and reached higher
levels than after instillation into the stomach, indicating that the compound
is absorbed at least as readily from the small intestine as from the stomach.
   According to Krause,15 in the small intestine, if concentration of nicotinic      25
acid is low, it is absorbed by sodium-dependent, carrier-mediated (facili-
tated) diffusion. At high concentrations (as with 3–4 g pharmacological doses
used to treat hyperlipidemia), it is absorbed almost completely by passive
diffusion. Up to approximately one-third of plasma nicotinic acid is bound
to proteins.                                                                         30
   Analytical quantification of nicotinic acid in plasma is challenging due
to its rapid metabolism. Nicotinic acid has not been detected after admin-
istration of 350 mL freshly prepared coffee brew containing about 3.1 mg
of the vitamin.38 Plasma nicotinic acid concentrations slightly above the
limit of quantification (0.4 µM) were only reported in samples from a clin-          35
ical pharmacokinetic study after a bolus administration of 1000 mg of the
vitamin.43
   The metabolism of food-derived doses of nicotinic acid primarily involves
conversion into its amide nicotinamide, which is the functional part of
the coenzymes NAD and NADP, playing a key role in numerous dehydroge-                40
nase-catalyzed reactions in living organisms.38,43 Both nicotinic acid and nic-
otinamide move across cell membranes by simple diffusion, then transport
into the kidney tubules and red blood cells requires a carrier.44 Nicotinamide
is N-methylated via S-adenosylmethionine, giving rise to N-methylnicotin-
amide and subsequently oxidized to yield N-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carbox-               45
amide and N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide, both major metabolites
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                          441
                         37,38
identified in plasma.        Pharmacologic doses of 1–6 g of nicotinamide or                1
nicotinic acid have been shown to induce the formation (by glycine conju-
gation) of nicotinuric acid in addition to nicotinamide as major metabolites
in plasma and urinary excretion of nicotinuric acid and nicotinamide-N-ox-
ide.38,43,44 Nicotinuric acid was also found to be the major urinary metabolite             5
after intake of 100 mg of nicotinic acid (doses possibly consumed through
foods).45–47
   In humans, dogs, rats and pigs, excess of nicotinic acid is mainly disposed.46
In humans, in addition to nicotinuric acid, low amounts of N-methylnicotin-
amide, nicotinamide and in a few subjects non-metabolized nicotinic acid                   10
were found to occur in the urine of only a few subjects and this was associ-
ated with flushing and other vasodilatation symptoms.47 In rats, however,
nicotinic acid seems to be always disposed in urine. Approximately 5% of
the niacin (nicotinic acid and/or nicotinamide) consumed is converted into
trigonelline.48                                                                            15
   Figure 18.1 presents the main trigonelline roasting derivatives in coffee as
well as their main metabolites identified in human plasma.


18.4 Toxicology                                                                           20
The oral and subcutaneous median lethal dose of trigonelline was found to
be approximately 5000 mg kg−1 in rats. When female Sabra albino mice were
fed 50 mg kg−1 of trigonelline daily for 21 days, no changes in the weight of
the liver, kidney, thymus, thyroid, adrenals, uterus or ovaries were identified,
and no mice died during the experiment.51 There are no reports of ingestion                25
of toxic doses in humans and the intake through foods or supplements is
much lower than the lethal dose in rats.


                                                                                           30




                                                                                           35




                                                                                           40




Figure 18.1 Trigonelline      roasting    products     and   their   metabolites    in   45
                humans.13,18,41,49,50
442                                                                  Chapter 18
   The most common side effect of nicotinic acid is a cutaneous vasodila-           1
tation called flushing. A dose of 50–100 mg of nicotinic acid which may be
reached through coffee drinking is sufficient to elicit flushing of the face
and upper body, but it rarely occurs.52,53 Higher doses (500–1000 mg) may
lead to a much stronger vasodilatation that also affects the rest of the body.      5
Such doses can be easily reached in treatments for dyslipidemia (see below).
The flush lasts for 30–90 min and is associated with intense erythema, tin-
gling, itching and elevation in skin temperature. The symptoms are often
described as being similar to a sunburn, but shorter lasting. Some patients
are prone to more severe skin reactions, with additional burning sensation,        10
urticaria, periorbital edema, conjunctivitis or nasal congestion. But flush-
ing is seen primarily in the beginning of nicotinic acid therapy (and possibly
coffee drinking in the case of those who are sensitive to low concentrations).
Up to one-third of patients treated with nicotinic acid discontinue the drug
mainly owing to intolerable flushing.54 This does not happen for most coffee       15
consumers, since the amount found is actually 20 or more times lower than
those used for clinical purposes.


18.5 Bioactivity                                                                  20
18.5.1 Effects on Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 and Its
        Complications
Diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2) accounts for 90–95% of those with diabetes.
Previously referred to as non-insulin dependent diabetes, type 2 diabetes, or      25
adult-onset diabetes, it encompasses individuals who have insulin resistance
and usually have relative (rather than absolute) insulin deficiency.55 DM2 is
characterized by increased levels of blood glucose owing to insulin resistance
in adipose tissue, muscle and liver and an associated β-cell dysfunction.56
Several mechanisms have been proposed to account for this β-cell failure,          30
including oxidative stress, amyloid deposition, lipotoxicity and glucotoxic-
ity.57 Interestingly, all these factors are associated with anti-inflammatory
response.58
   A number of meta-analyses of large epidemiological studies59–66 have
pointed to a clear inverse association between coffee consumption and              35
the risk of developing diabetes. In the study by Ding et al.,66 for example,
the risk of developing type 2 diabetes was reduced linearly by 33% for six
cups of regular coffee consumed daily. Similarly, a 20% risk reduction was
observed with four cups of decaffeinated coffee per day.66 In a few animal
studies and clinical trials, decaffeination seemed to increase the anti-dia-       40
betic potential.67,68
   Animal studies have indicated that the main compounds responsible for
coffee effect against diabetes are trigonelline69–72 together with chlorogenic
acids and derivatives.68,73 Trigonelline is one of the main active components of
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum L.), a traditional Chinese herb used for      45
prevention and treatment of diabetes and central nervous system diseases.
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                  443
   In different studies using rodent diabetic models, trigonelline was able          1
to inhibit intestinal glucose uptake, improve insulin sensitivity, improve
β-cell regeneration in the pancreas, increase glucokinase/glucose-6-phos-
phatase ratio and lower serum levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α.3,4,48
Trigonelline also counteracted the hyperglycemic effect of cortisone when            5
administered concomitantly, but not when administered 2 h after cortisone
administration, in non-diabetic rabbits.48 In human trials,74 trigonelline and
chlorogenic acids reduced early glucose and insulin response during an oral
glucose tolerance test, consistent with a contribution to the putative benefi-
cial effect of coffee on development of type 2 diabetes. More human studies         10
are needed to prove the same effects observed in animals.
   The involvement of nicotinic acid in the anti-diabetic effect of coffee is
not well elucidated. In different studies, after acute administration of nico-
tinic acid in rats and humans, glucose concentrations have been reported
to fall,75,76 rise76 or remain unchanged.3,77 Results from glucose tolerance        15
tests after oral administration of nicotinic acid have also been inconsistent,
reporting no effect78 or deterioration of glucose tolerance and elevation of
fasting blood glucose concentrations. Human studies have reported dete-
rioration of glycemic control in type 2 diabetes after chronic oral admin-
istration of nicotinic acid.25,78–80 However, Chen et al.81 reported that acute     20
administration of nicotinic acid altered gluconeogenesis and glucose pro-
duction indirectly by altering serum free fatty acid concentrations. They
observed initial suppression of gluconeogenesis when free fatty acid con-
centrations were low and then an increase in gluconeogenesis when such
concentrations rebounded, consistent with the operations of a glucose-fatty         25
acid cycle in liver. On the other hand, reports have shown that lowering
free fatty acids concentrations with nicotinic acid can reduce pancreatic
insulin secretion, which could outweigh direct insulin sensitizing effects
on tissues.81
   In studies conducted with both non-obese (GKrats)3 and obese (KK-Ay              30
mice)4 rodent models with developed type 2 diabetes, trigonelline sup-
pressed the increase in blood glucose levels, improving glucose tolerance,
while the diet using nicotinic acid only tended to have such effect. As a por-
tion of nicotinic acid is converted to trigonelline in vivo, it was suggested4
that trigonelline converted from nicotinic acid and trigonelline metabolites        35
might have contributed to the mild improvement of insulin resistance in the
nicotinic acid group. The regulation of glucokinase and glucose-6-phospha-
tase and TNF-α production by trigonelline and nicotinic acid were suggested
to be the mechanisms closely related to suppression of progression of diabe-
tes in the KK-Ay mice.4                                                             40
   Trigonelline not only has been shown to help decrease blood glucose but
it has also attenuated some diabetes complications in KK-Ay obese mice.
Improvement of glucose tolerance in rodents was accompanied by lower-
ing in levels of triglycerides in the liver and adipose tissue, suggesting effec-
tiveness to improve the changes in lipid levels that occur in diabetes.4 As a       45
common complication of diabetes, diabetic neuropathy (a hearing disorder
    444                                                                  Chapter 18
    characterized by an abnormal auditory brainstem response) affects likely            1
    up to one-third of adults with diabetes.82 Both coffee and trigonelline con-
    sumption improved the hearing threshold shift and the delayed latency of
    the auditory evoked potential of diabetic ICR mice with neuropathy.7 The
    otoprotective effect of trigonelline was suggested to result from the enhance-      5
    ment of neurite outgrowth, although the neurotrophic role of trigonelline
    was not examined in the referred study.7
       The main studies evaluating the effect of trigonelline and nicotinic acid on
    type 2 diabetes are presented in Table 18.1. For more information on coffee
AQ3 effect on diabetes see Chapter X of this book.                                     10

    18.5.2 Hypolipidemic Effect
    There is ample epidemiological evidence linking obesity, and the related
    “metabolic syndrome”, with vascular disease.86 Conventionally, adipose             15
    tissue has been regarded as an inert store of triglycerides and fatty acids,
    but there is accumulating evidence that adipose tissue is involved in more
    diverse activity, including pro-inflammatory processes.87 Adipose tissue
    is an important target for nicotinic acid, where it is distributed almost
    exclusively.88,89                                                                  20
       The pioneering work of Rudolf Altschul and coworkers90 performed in the
    1950s demonstrated that supraphysiological doses of nicotinic acid, but not
    of nicotinamide, have additional biological effects unrelated to those as a
    vitamin. The administration of gram quantities of nicotinic acid reduced
    total cholesterol plasma levels in healthy human volunteers and to an even         25
    greater extent in patients suffering from pathologically high levels of cho-
    lesterol. Shortly after this discovery, nicotinic acid was introduced into
    clinical practice to treat dyslipidemia by lowering low-density lipoprotein
    (LDL)-cholesterol levels, while raising high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cho-
    lesterol levels.91,92 The effects of 1.5 g nicotinic acid oral administration on   30
    human plasma concentrations of lipids and lipoproteins in different studies
    reviewed by Gille et al.93 were: 25–40% reduction in VLDL, 6–22% reduction
    in LDL-cholesterol, 18–35% raise in HDL-cholesterol, 4–16% reduction in
    total cholesterol, 21–44% reduction in triglyceride and 16–36% reduction in
    Lipoprotein Lp(a). Moreover, LDL reduction was accompanied by a shift in           35
    the subclass distribution of LDL from small, dense particles to larger, more
    buoyant particles.94,95 Some studies suggest that this shift in the subclass
    distribution may be as important as the overall LDL reduction, since small,
    dense LDL particles are more atherogenic than larger LDL particles, as exem-
    plified by the atherogenic dyslipidemia seen in patients with metabolic syn-       40
    drome and diabetes mellitus.96
       The most probable mechanism of action for the anti-lipolytic effect of
    nicotinic acid is activation of the nicotinic acid receptor GPR109A on adi-
    pocytes which induces a Gi-mediated inhibition of adenylyl cyclase (AC)
    activity, resulting in a decrease of cAMP levels. This leads to a decrease in      45
    lipolysis, as cAMP is the main intracellular mediator of prolipolytic stimuli,
    Table 18.1 Summary of studies investigating the effect of physiological doses of trigonelline and derivatives in type 2 diabetes mellitus
                   and complications.
    Animal or material                       Intervention                          Main effect(s)                                        Ref­erence
    In vitro study using New Zealand         Incubation of membrane with 3         Inhibition of intestinal sodium-dependent glucose 83
       white rabbits' intestinal brush bor-    mg mL−1 trigonelline for 1 h.          uptake.
       der membrane vesicles.
AQ4 Non-obese type 2 diabetic rats (male Oral administration of 11.2 mg 100 Trigonelline: increase in the insulin serum level             3
       Wistar – normal control (n = 5) and     g−1 body weight of trigonelline        after 15 min of oral glucose tolerance test and
       8 weeks old GK rats (n = 5).            and 10 mg 100 g−1 body weight          gradual decrease over the next 120 min (unlike
                                               of nicotinic acid for 26–27 days.      the gradual increase observed in the control rats);
                                             Diet and water ad libitum.            Trigonelline and nicotinic acid: reduced the glu-
                                                                                      cose level between 15 and 60 min of oral glucose
                                                                                      tolerance test compared to control group, and
                                                                                      improved glucose tolerance.
    Obese type 2 diabetic mice (male         Oral administration of 11.2 mg 100 Both compounds improved glucose tolerance in              4
       KK-Ay/TaJcl and C57BL/6J mice – 6       g−1 body weight trigonelline and       diabetes with obesity on day 22–23;
       weeks old) (n = 7 in both groups).      10 mg 100 g−1 body weight nico-
                                               tinic acid (NA) for 28 days.
                                             Diet and water ad libitum.            The serum insulin levels at fasting showed signifi-
                                                                                      cantly lower levels in mice fed trigonelline, and
                                                                                                                                                      Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health




                                                                                      a lower tendency in mice fed NA, compared to
                                                                                      the control mice.
    Obese type 2 diabetic rats (n = 10;      Oral administration of 50 mg kg−1 Progressive reduction in blood glucose after 4             85
       male Wistar rats; 180–220 g, Grade      per day trigonelline by gavage         weeks of repeated trigonelline administration.
       II) – induced by Streptozocin- and      for 4 consecutive weeks. Diet
       high-carbohydrate/high-fat diet.        and water were given ad libitum.
    15 overweight men (BMI 25–35             Oral administration of 500 mg of Trigonelline significantly lowered glucose and              74
       kg m−2) aged 39.9 ± 16.5 years,         trigonelline for 15 min follow-        insulin concentrations 15 min after oral glucose
       healthy, non-smoking, coffee            ing a 2 h oral glucose tolerance       load but did not significantly reduce the oral
       consumers.                              test.                                  glucose tolerance test insulin.
    15 overweight men (BMI 25–35 kg          Oral administration of 500 mg of      No effect on overall glucagon-like peptide-1           84
       m−2) aged 39.9 ± 16.5 years, healthy,   trigonelline for 15 min following a    (GLP-1) or gastric inhibitory peptide secretion
                                                                                                                                                      445




       non-smoking, coffee consumers.          2 h oral glucose tolerance test.       pattern.




      45
                      40
                                      35
                                                      30
                                                                      25
                                                                                     20
                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                 1
446                                                                  Chapter 18
such as sympathetic stimuli acting through the β-adrenoceptor (β-AR). cAMP         1
activates protein kinase A (PKA), which increases lipolysis by phosphoryla-
tion of various proteins, including perilipin and hormone-sensitive lipase
(HSL). The decrease in free fatty acid levels induced by nicotinic acid results
in a substrate shortage for hepatic triglyceride synthesis. Consequently,          5
fewer triglycerides and less VLDL are produced by the liver and, as a result,
triglyceride and VLDL as well as LDL plasma levels drop. The mechanism of
the nicotinic acid-induced increase in HDL cholesterol levels is less clear.
Most likely, the decrease in triglyceride levels in ApoB-containing lipo-
proteins (LDL/VLDL) results in a decreased exchange between cholesterol           10
esters carried by HDL particles and triglycerides in VLDL and LDL parti-
cles mediated by CETP, resulting in an increase in HDL cholesterol plasma
concentrations.93
   Nicotinic acid was the first drug shown to have an effect on total mortality
in long-term treatment of coronary heart disease.59 Numerous clinical stud-       15
ies have demonstrated a significant reduction in cardiac events and cardio-
vascular disease-related mortality with nicotinic acid treatment.97–99 It has
been observed that such treatment also increases plasma levels of the adi-
pocyte derived atheroprotective hormone adiponectin,100–102 raising the pos-
sibility that some of the effects of nicotinic acid may be mediated through       20
lipid-independent pathways.
   Through several mechanisms, nicotinic acid also inhibits oxidation of
LDL cholesterol, one of the critical early steps contributing to the devel-
opment of atherosclerosis. Susceptibility to oxidative modification is
directly related to LDL particle density,103 which is reduced by nicotinic        25
acid. Another mechanism is that HDL which is increased by nicotinic acid
contains at least three components that inhibit LDL oxidation, namely,
apolipoprotein, the antioxidant enzyme paraoxonase and platelet-activat-
ing factor acetylhydrolase.104 In addition, HDL can exchange its unoxidized
phospholipids for the oxidized phospholipids in LDL, further reducing the         30
concentration of oxidized LDL.105 Finally, through effects on nitric oxide
synthase, HDL decreases the atherothrombotic potential of any oxidized
LDL that is formed by blocking the ability of oxidized LDL to stimulate
platelet aggregation.106
   Irrespective of nicotinic acid effects when administered in supraphysio-       35
logical doses, in physiological doses no significant effect has been seen in
hyperlipidemic subjects. Although oral administration of 200 mg of nicotinic
acid (corresponding to about 500 mL coffee) has reduced human plasma free
fatty acids within minutes, this was followed by a rebound effect 1 h after
administration.59 Therefore, the vitamin is administered in gram doses to         40
grant a prolonged effect, which, as mentioned in the toxicology topic, can
cause substantial side effects such as skin flushing.
   The effects of trigonelline in hyperlipidemia are not clear, especially in
humans, since there are only a few studies investigating this theme and they
were performed in diabetic rodents or in vitro. No human intervention study       45
using trigonelline was found.
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health             447
   The oral administration of trigonelline and nicotinic acid (11.2 mg and      1
10 g 100 g−1 body weight, respectively) to different groups of GK diabetic
rats for 26 days decreased liver fatty acid synthase activity, and increased
liver carnitine palmitoyl transferase and glucokinase activities, suggest-
ing that the regulation of these enzymes by trigonelline and nicotinic acid     5
is closely related to the suppression of triglyceride accumulation as well
as progression of diabetes.3 Such effects were more pronounced in the
case of trigonelline than in nicotinic acid. Similar results were observed
in KK-Ay diabetic mice.4 In another study also using induced diabetic
rats, four-week treatment with 50 mg kg−1 of trigonelline decreased            10
total serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels suggesting that trigonel-
line has a beneficial effect in diabetes through decreasing both blood
glucose and lipid levels, increasing insulin sensitivity index and insulin
content, up-regulating antioxidant enzyme activity and decreasing lipid
peroxidation.85                                                                15
   Human studies investigating the potential hypolipidemic effect of coffee
and physiological doses of trigonelline derivatives are needed, especially
considering that the consumption of unfiltered coffee has been associated
with hypercholesterolemia attributed to diterpenes.
                                                                               20
18.5.3 Antioxidant and Anti-tumorigenic Effects
The beneficial effects of coffee related to the reduced risk of degenera-
tive diseases have been partially attributed to its antioxidant activities
derived from a number of compounds. Increased lipid peroxidation and           25
reduced antioxidant status may contribute to the development of com-
plications in diabetes.107 Among different mechanisms of coffee trigonel-
line to help prevent diabetes is through its antioxidant property. Using
electron spin resonance methods, trigonelline showed weak scavenging
ability against 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical, but no scavenge abil-   30
ity against the OH radical. However, the levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in HT29 human colon cancer cells were distinctly diminished after
24 h incubation with trigonelline. Different radical scavenging abilities
observed for differentially substituted niacin related compounds pointed
to the importance of the resonant structure of the pyridine ring, high-        35
lighting trigonelline's contribution to the antioxidant effects of coffee.6
Additionally, in a complementary study designed to evaluate the bene-
ficial effects of trigonelline against hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia,
administration of 50 mg kg−1 trigonelline via gavage to type 2 diabetic
Sprague-Dawley rats for 4 weeks decreased malonaldehyde and nitric             40
oxide levels, and increased superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione
and inducible nitric oxide synthase activities in the pancreas. Together
these findings suggest that although trigonelline has low hydroxyl radical
scavenging activity, as shown using electron spin resonance methods, it
acts on up-regulating antioxidant enzyme activities and decreasing lipid       45
peroxidation in the pancreas.48,71
    448                                                                   Chapter 18
       Regarding the potential antioxidant effect of N-methylpyridinium, in             1
    the study performed by Somoza et al.,24 coffee beverage prepared at 4.5%
    (4 g of coffee for 100 mL water, ad libitum) and N-methylpyridinium (22 mg
    kg−1 body weight) were offered to different groups of male adult Wistar rats
    for 15 days. In the liver, feeding coffee beverage resulted in increases of         5
AQ5 glutathione S-transferase (GST) and UDP-glucuronyltransferase (UDP-GT)
    activities by 24% and 40%, respectively, compared to animals fed the con-
    trol diet. In the N-methylpyridinium-fed group, GST and UDP-GT activi-
    ties were increased by 22% and 65%, respectively. Plasma total antioxidant
    capacity and plasma tocopherol were also elevated in the rats fed both the         10
    coffee beverage and the N-methylpyridinium-containing diet, demonstrat-
    ing antioxidant activity of N-methylpyridinium in biological systems. The
    balance between the phase I carcinogen-activating enzymes and the phase
    II detoxifying enzymes is critical to determining an individual's risk for
    cancer. Human deficiencies in phase II enzyme activity, specifically GST,          15
    have been identified and associated with increased risk for colon cancer.
    Conversely, the induction of GST or other phase II enzymes, for exam-
    ple UDP-GT, by antioxidants represents a promising strategy for cancer
    prevention.24
       In its broadest sense, cancer represents the final result of abnormal cell      20
    growth and can occur in most human tissues. In the past, coffee was found
    to be associated with an increased cancer risk; however, based on recent epi-
    demiological data, the scientific community agrees that coffee consumption
    is actually associated with a lower overall risk of cancer, especially liver and
    colorectal cancer.108 Rat serum loaded with trigonelline and nicotinic acid        25
    metabolites collected after oral administration of physiological doses of
    both compounds suppressed the invasion of AH109A rat ascites hepatoma
    cells ex vivo, although they exerted almost no influence on hepatoma cell
    proliferation at the same concentrations. When AH109A cells were pre-cul-
    tured in the hypoxanthine and xanthine-oxidase systems which generated             30
    ROS and increased the invasive activity of AH109A cells, rat serum loaded
    with trigonelline and nicotinic acid metabolites still suppressed the ROS-po-
    tentiated invasive activity in these pre-treated cells.9 More studies are needed
    to corroborate such promising results.
                                                                                       35
    18.5.4 Antifibrotic and Hepatoprotective Effect
    Cirrhosis is the end-stage consequence of hepatic parenchyma fibrosis and
    results in nodule formation and altered hepatic function. Fibrosis and cir-
    rhosis result from a sustained wound-healing response to chronic liver injury      40
    from a variety of causes including viral, autoimmune, drug-induced, choles-
    tatic and metabolic diseases.109 Liver fibrosis is initiated by mechanisms
    that lead to inflammation, which activates a wound-healing response due
    to the production of the fibrogenic cytokine transforming growth factor-β
    (TGF-β).110                                                                        45
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                449
   Evidences from several studies suggest that nicotinic acid is a potential       1
antifibrotic agent. Treatment with pulverized chow containing 2.5% of nic-
otinic acid (w/w) attenuated collagen accumulation and lung fibrosis in a
bleomycin hamster model.111–113 Nicotinic acid also inhibited liver fibro-
sis in rats intoxicated with thioacetamide by suppressing DNA synthesis            5
and enhancing apoptosis of hepatic stellate cells.114 In another study,115
thioacetamide-induced liver fibrosis was prevented by orally administered
nicotinic acid (50 mg kg−1) in Wistar male rats for 8 weeks. This effect was
suggested to be associated with the ability of nicotinic acid to down-regu-
late TGF-β cytokine. The decrease in TGF-β levels may be associated with          10
the attenuation of the oxidative processes, thus resulting in a reduction
in hepatic stellate cells activation and extracellular matrix deposition. The
findings suggest a possible role of nicotinic acid as an antifibrotic agent in
liver injury.
                                                                                  15
18.5.5 Effects on the Central Nervous System
Trigonelline from plants like fenugreek or coffee have been suggested in dif-
ferent studies as a potential substance to treat certain disorders related to
the central nervous system. Accumulating evidence indicates that trigonel-        20
line has neuroprotective effects in several animal and cellular models of
brain disorders, such as Parkinson's disease,115 and seizure,2 in addition to
stimulating neurite outgrowth.48
   Neuropathies in general result from degeneration and loss of neurons in
certain brain areas. Synaptic formation in neuronal networks is based on          25
axonal and dendritic structures, and so neurite outgrowth is a necessary
step for reconstructing neuronal networks.116 Neurite or neuronal process
refers to any projection from the cell body of a neuron. This projection can
be either an axon or a dendrite. The term is frequently used when speaking
of immature or developing neurons, especially of cells in culture, because        30
it can be difficult to tell axons from dendrites before differentiation is com-
plete.117 In the study by Tohda116 a methanol extract of raw coffee been
(1 µg mL−1) significantly increased the percentage of human neuroblas-
toma SK-N-SH cells with neurites. Among the subfractions of the methanol
extract there was a basic one that, at 5 µg mL−1, significantly increased         35
neurite outgrowth. Trigonelline was identified as the active ingredient in
this subfraction. Treatment with trigonelline (30 µmol mL−1) increased the
percentage of cells with neurite after 3 and 6 days of treatment. In addi-
tion, 6-day treatment with trigonelline (30 µM) increased the number of
neurites that were positive for phosphorylated neurofilament-H, which is          40
correlated with axonal extension. Such results showed that trigonelline pro-
motes functional neurite outgrowth. In a later study,8 trigonelline showed
dendritic and axonal regeneration in rat cortical neurons, preventing both
dendritic and axonal atrophy induced by acetyl-amyloid β (25–35) peptide
or Aβ(25–35). Additionally, oral administration of 0.5 mg kg−1 trigonelline       45
450                                                                  Chapter 18
in ddY mice improved memory retention after Aβ(25–35)-induced memory               1
impairment.
   Parkinson's disease is a rather widespread neurodegenerative disorder
with cardinal clinical symptoms, for instance, bradykinesia, muscle rigidity,
resting-state tremor, postural imbalance and gait impairment.118 Mirzaie et        5
al.115 evaluated the protective effect of trigonelline at doses of 50 and 100
mg kg−1 in a striatal 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of Parkinson's disease.
At the dose of 100 mg kg−1, trigonelline significantly reduced rotations, pre-
vented reduction of central nervous system neurons, prevented apoptosis
and restored the levels of malondialdehyde. These results suggested that          10
trigonelline treatment on pre-lesions exerts dose-dependent neuroprotective
and antiapoptotic effects.
   An epileptic seizure, also known as an epileptic fit, is a brief episode of
signs or symptoms due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal
activity in the brain. Seizures can also occur in people who do not have epi-     15
lepsy for various reasons including brain trauma, drug use, elevated body
temperature, low blood sugar and low levels of oxygen.119 When adminis-
tered to rats, trigonelline elevated the seizure threshold, indicating that it
may act as a brain sedative.48,120 Trigonelline has also been suggested to have
antimigraine properties.2                                                         20

18.5.6 Anti-thrombotic Effect
Thrombophilia is considered as a condition predisposing to the develop-
ment of thrombosis.121 Arterial thrombosis or arterial embolism occurs            25
when a mass of tissue or a foreign substance travels through the vascu-
lar tree, ultimately lodging in a distal artery where it obstructs blood
flow. This obstruction leads to ischemia, organ dysfunction and potential
infarction.122
   Chlopicki et al.123 studied the antithrombotic action of (among other com-     30
pounds) the major nicotinic acid metabolite N-methylnicotinamide in male
Wistar rats. After being injected intravenously, N-methylnicotinamide induced
a dose-dependent and sustained thrombolytic response, associated with a rise
in blood levels of 6-keto-PGF1α(prostanoid), which is produced by endothelial
cells and inhibits platelet aggregation in addition to inducing vasodilation.     35
The other compounds structurally related to N-methylnicotinamide were
either inactive or weaker thrombolytics. N-methylnicotinamide inhibited
platelet-dependent thrombosis by a mechanism involving cyclooxygenase-2
and prostacyclin. The findings suggested that endogenous N-methylnicotin-
amide, produced in the liver by nicotinamide N-methyltransferase, may be          40
an endogenous activator of prostacyclin production and thus may regulate
thrombotic as well as inflammatory processes in the cardiovascular system.
   In humans, according to Gebicki18 and Lang et al.,38 after coffee intake,
N-methylnicotinamide may regulate inflammatory activity through multiple
mechanisms. According to Gebicki,18 it can be expected that when introduced       45
    Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                451
    into blood circulation, N-methylnicotinamide interacts with glycosaminogly-        1
    cans located on the surface of vascular endothelium cells without effective
    penetration inside the tissue, thus increasing its local concentration on the
    surface and reducing the adherence of pro-inflammatory cells and molecules
    to the surface of vascular endothelium.                                            5
       Kalaska et al.50 investigated the effect of N-methylpyridinium and two
    other minor pyridinium compounds formed upon trigonelline pyrolysis,
    1,3- and 1,4-dimethylpyridinium (100 mg kg−1 day−1 orally administrated,
    higher amount than those found in coffee) on experimentally induced arte-
    rial thrombosis in male Wistar rats. 1,3- and 1,4-dimethylpyridinium inhib-       10
    ited arterial thrombus formation. 1,3-dimethylpyridinium also inhibited
    platelet aggregation and reduced fibrin formation in platelet-rich plasma.
    Pyridinium compounds displayed mild antithrombotic properties due to
    stimulation by prostacyclin release (1,4-dimethylpyridinium) and inhibition
    of platelet aggregation (1,3-dimethylpyridinium), and it was hypothesized         15
    that 1,3-dimethylpyridinium may be a promising agent preventing athero-
    thrombosis development, where the platelets play a crucial role, whereas
    1,4-dimethylpyridinium may be beneficial in situations with impaired pros-
    tacyclin endothelial production.
                                                                                      20
    18.5.7 Phytoestrogenic Effect
    This area of study is almost unexplored but holds potential. Allred et al.10
    performed a study to determine whether trigonelline altered the actions of
    estradiol, using proliferation of estrogen-dependent human breast cancer          25
    (MCF-7) cells as a model system. Cells were treated with estradiol (10 pmol
    L−1) or one of three different concentrations of trigonelline (1, 10 and 100
    pmol L−1). When cells were co-treated with suboptimal doses of estradiol
    (10 pmol L−1) and trigonelline (100 pmol L−1), an additive enhancement of
    MCF-7 growth was observed, stimulating cells growth to a greater extent than      30
    estradiol alone. In the absence of estradiol, trigonelline stimulated MCF-7
    cells proliferation in a dose–response manner and significantly enhanced
    cell growth at concentrations as low as 100 pmol L−1. Co-treatment of MCF-7
    cells with trigonelline and ICI (an estrogen receptor antagonist) inhibited
    trigonelline-induced cell proliferation.                                          35
       In an additional essay involving genomic DNA, trigonelline increased
    expression of estrogen receptor target genes similar to estradiol. Competi-
AQ6 tive binding assays showed that trigonelline does not compete estradiol off
    the estrogen receptor at any concentration. This suggests that trigonelline
    activates the estrogen receptor through a different mechanism that does           40
    not involve the compound binding the active site of the receptor. Collec-
    tively, these data identify trigonelline as a novel phytoestrogen. More studies
    should be performed to explore this new area of interest, including potential
    use of trigonelline-rich coffee for women in menopause and potential need
    for coffee restrictions in endocrine-related cancers.                             45
452                                                                  Chapter 18

18.5.8 Gastroprotective Effect                                                     1
A number of coffee consumers report an increase in stomach acidity and
heartburn after drinking coffee and different studies have attributed such
effect to different compounds. Rubach et al.124 evaluated the effect of coffee      5
candidate compounds (chlorogenic acid, caffeine, pyrogallol, catechol, (β)
N-alkanoyl-hydroxytryptamides (C5HT) and N-methylpyridinium) at repre-
sentative concentrations in coffee beverage, on gastric secretion by using a
human parietal gastric cancer cells (HGT-1) model. While caffeine was found
to stimulate gastric secretion, N-methylpyridinium was found to effectively        10
down-regulate mechanisms of gastric acid secretion in these cells. In a simi-
lar study,125 N-methylpyridinium acted as an antisecretory compound in cof-
fee beverage, but not as an isolated substance and not in a dose–response
manner.
   More recently, Antonisamy et al.126 performed a study to explore the poten-     15
tial gastroprotective effect of trigonelline using male Sprague-Dawley rats in
an indomethacin-induced ulcer model. Trigonelline (45 mg kg−1) pretreatment
significantly inhibited gastric lesions by about 82% and also showed signif-
icant rises in prostaglandin E2 and antioxidant levels along with substantial
reductions in leukotriene B4, lipid peroxidation and myeloperoxidase levels.       20
Indomethacin-induced rats also exhibited considerable increase in pro-in-
flammatory cytokines and decrease in anti-inflammatory cytokines, but these
imbalances were normalized through treatment of trigonelline. Together, the
results showed that trigonelline overcame oxidative stress, cytokine imbalance,
inflammation and apoptosis through augmenting the activities of antioxidant        25
enzymes, preventing the production of inflammatory markers and inhibiting
microvascular permeability and apoptose. Therefore, trigonelline presented a
preventive potential against gastric ulcers induced by indomethacin.

                                                                                   30
18.5.9 Antimicrobial Effect
Coffee has shown antimicrobial effect against pathogens residing in both the
oral cavity and the intestine, among others. A few compounds proved to be
responsible for such effect, including trigonelline.
   In the study by Almeida et al.127 using the disc diffusion method, trigonel-    35
line showed inhibitory effect against nine strains of enterobacteria (Citro-
bacter freundii, Enterobacter aerogenes, Enterobacter cloacae, Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella oxytoca, Proteus hauseri, Proteus mirabilis, Salmonella enterica and
Serratia marcescens). Furthermore, the 50% (IC50) and 90% (IC90) inhibitory
concentrations of trigonelline against Salmonella enterica, which is a highly      40
invasive pathogen that infects humans and causes systemic infections, were
determined by the microtiter plate method. With an IC50 of 2.2 mg mL−1 and
an IC90 of 3.8 mg mL−1, trigonelline, was found to act as a natural antimicro-
bial agent against S. enterica and also against other enterobacteria and, there-
fore, the authors suggested that it could be used as a natural preservative to     45
control their growth in foods.
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                    453
                                                              128
   Using the microdilution method, Özçelik et al. evaluated the effect of              1
trigonelline treatment against a number of microorganisms. Trigonelline
displayed very high antibacterial activity towards the following organisms
and their isolated strains: Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus
mirabilis, Klebsiella pneumonia, Acinetobacter baumannii, Enterococcus faeca-          5
lis, Bacillus subtilis, Candida albicans and Candida parapsilosis. The alkaloid
showed especially high anti-Candida activity at 4 µg mL−1. Trigonelline was
ineffective, nevertheless, against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
and extended spectrum β-lactamase strains.
   Antonio et al.129 investigated the influence of antibacterial activity of coffee   10
and coffee compounds against Streptococcus mutans, the main causative agent
of caries. MIC, biofilm inhibition and biofilm reduction results were cor-
related with the concentration of coffee compounds in the extracts. Among
other compounds, trigonelline inhibited the growth of S. mutans with MIC
of 0.8 mg mL−1 (bacteriostatic activity), with no bactericidal activity observed      15
at this concentration. When evaluating coffee extracts, the authors observed
that trigonelline antimicrobial effects were enhanced by the presence of caf-
feine and/or other compounds extracted by decaffeination. Nicotinic acid did
not show bacteriostatic activity against S. mutans at tested concentrations.
The authors suggested that higher concentrations were tested to investigate           20
potential bacteriostatic activity of nicotinic acid, as well as the bactericidal
activity of trigonelline.
   In a later study, Da Silva et al.130 evaluated the Minimum Inhibitory
Concentration (MIC) and Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) of
trigonelline against cariogenic microorganisms (Streptococcus parasanguinis           25
and Lactobacillus rhamnosus) and pathogens related to periodontal disease
(Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Prevotella intermedia and
Prevotella nigrescens). A range of concentrations was tested and trigonelline
exerted inhibitory activity against the growth of S. parasanguinis (MIC = 2.56
to 1.28 mg mL−1), L. rhamnosus (MIC = 2.56 mg mL−1), P. gingivalis (MIC = 2.56        30
to 1.28 mg mL−1), P. intermedia (MIC = 2.56 to 1.28 mg mL−1), P. nigrescens
(MIC = 2.56 mg mL−1), F. nucleatum (MIC = 5.12 mg mL−1). Also, trigonelline
showed bactericide properties against S. parasanguinis (MBC = 2.56 mg mL−1),
P. gingivalis (MBC = 2.56 mg mL−1), F. nucleatum (MBC = 10.24 mg mL−1), P.
nigrescens (MBC = 5.12 mg mL−1) and P. intermedia (MBC = 2.56 mg mL−1). The           35
authors concluded that the inhibitory activity of trigonelline was stronger in
periodontal pathogens compared to the cariogenic ones.


18.6 Concluding Remarks                                                              40
The most studied effects of trigonelline when consumed in coffee-derived
doses are related to the prevention of type 2 diabetes. Before trigonelline
and derivatives or trigonelline-enriched coffee can be used clinically in the
co-treatment of diabetes and its complications or in other maladies, not only
mechanistic studies but further in vivo (especially human) and in vitro meta-         45
bolic studies are required.
      454                                                                  Chapter 18
         Other health properties discussed here are still modestly explored but           1
      promising, and therefore more studies are needed to corroborate currently
      existing results. The hypolipidemic effects of nicotinic acid and possibly
      trigonelline when consumed in physiological doses tend to be ephemeral,
      but considering that coffee is usually consumed regularly and long term, the        5
      possibility of a preventive effect of the filtered beverage should be investi-
      gated. Also, trigonelline's antioxidant effect and action on transcriptional
      pathways should be further investigated and understood, together with other
      possible mechanisms of action to prevent or ameliorate diseases.
                                                                                         10
      References
        1.	J. Mishkinsky, B. Joseph and F. G. Sulman, Lancet, 1967, 290, 1311.
        2.	Z. Errol and T. Raymond, in Review of Toxicological Literature, ed. A. S.
            Masten, Integrated Laboratory Systems, North Carolina, 2005, 9, pp.          15
            12–97.
        3.	O. Yoshinari, H. Sato and K. Igarashi, Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 2009,
            73, 1033.
        4.	O. Yoshinari and K. Igarashi, Curr. Med. Chem., 2010, 17, 2196.
        5.	A. N. Abdulmumin, ISRN Nutr., 2014, 13, 1.                                   20
        6.	T. Bakuradze, R. Lang, T. Hofmann, H. Stiebitz, G. Bytof, I. Lantz, M.
            Baum, G. Eisenbrand and C. Janzowski, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2010, 54,
            1734.
        7.	B. N. Hong, T. H. Yi, R. Park, S. Y. Kim and T. H. Kang, Neurosci. Lett.,
            2008, 3, 302.                                                                25
        8.	C. Tohda, T. Kuboyama and K. Komatsu, Neurosignals, 2005, 14, 34.
        9.	N. Hirakawa, R. Okauchi, Y. Miura and K. Yagasaki, Biosci. Biotechnol.
            Biochem., 2005, 69, 653.
       10.	K. Allred, K. Yackley, J. Vanamala and C. Allred, J. Nutr., 2009, 4, 1833.
       11.	S. Naito, C. Yatagai, M. Maruyama and H. Sumi, Jpn. J. Alcohol Stud. Drug    30
AQ7         Depend., 2011, 46, 260.
       12.	R. Lang, A. Wahl, T. Stark and T. Hofmann, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2011,
            55, 1613.
       13.	R. Lang, A. Wahl, T. Stark and T. Hofmann, in Recent Advances in the Anal
            Bioanal Chem, ed. S. Toth and C. Mussinan, 2013, vol. 26, p. 8487.           35
       14.	J. Arauz, Y. Rivera-Espinoza, M. Shibayama, L. Favari, R. Flores-Beltrán
            and P. Muriel, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2015, 28, 244.
       15.	P. Charney, in Krause's Food Nutrition & Diet Therapy, ed. L. K. Mahan
            and J. L. Raymond, Elsevier, Missouri, 10th edn, 2005, vol. 3, 10, p. 158.
       16.	L. B. Wang, V. Leray, M. Chetiveaux, B. Freuchet, T. Magot, M. Krempf,       40
            P. Nguyen and K. Ouguerram, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 2000, 334,
            583.
       17.	R. S. Rosenson, Atherosclerosis, 2003, 171, 87.
       18.	J. Gebicki, A. Sysa-Jedrzejowska, J. Adamus, R. M. Wo'zniacka and J.
            Zielonka, Pol. J. Pharmacol., 2003, 55, 109–112.                             45
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                  455
 19.	K. Shibata and H. Taguchi, Vitamins, 1991, 61, 493.                            1
 20.	H. Ashihara, I. A. Ludwing, R. Katahira, T. Yokota, T. Fujimura and A.
      Crozier, Phytochem. Rev., 2015, 14, 765.
 21.	D. Perrone, C. M. Donangelo and A. Farah, Food Chem., 2008, 110,
      1030.                                                                          5
 22.	A. Farah, in Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention, ed. Y.
      F. Chu, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2012, 2, pp. 20–58.
 23.	R. H. Stadler, N. Varga, J. Hau, F. A. Vera and D. J. Welti, J. Agric. Food
      Chem., 2002, 50, 1200.
 24.	V. Somoza, M. Lindenmeier, E. Wenzel, O. Frank, H. F. Erbersdobler and        10
      T. Hofmann, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2003, 51, 6861.
 25.	G. F. Gibbons and D. Wiggins, Adv. Enzyme Regul., 2007, 35, 179.
 26.	United States Department of Agriculture, https://www.nal.usda.gov/
      fnic/niacin-vitamin-b3, (last acessed in January 2017).
 27.	Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Health         15
      Organization, http://www.fao.org/3/a-y2809e.pdf, (last acessed in Janu-
      ary, 2017).
 28.	L. J. Teply and R. F. Prier, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1957, 5, 375.
 29.	National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Washing-
      ton, D.C., Recommended dietary allowance, 1953, vol. 302, p. 1.               20
 30.	K. J. Carpenter, Exper. Suppl., 1983, 44, 197.
 31.	R. Macrae, Coffee, in Chemistry, ed. R. J. Clarke and R. Macrae, Elsevier,
      London, 1985, pp. 114–152.
 32.	A. Farah, in Coffee: Chemistry, Quality and Health, ed. A. Farah, Royal
      Society of Chemistry, 1st edn, 2017, p. 1.                                    25
 33.	W. Wang, A. Basinger, R. A. Neese, B. Shane, S. A. Myong, M. Christian-
      sen and M. K. Hellerstein, Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 2001, 280,
      352.
 34.	J. Le Bloch, V. Leray, M. Chetiveaux, B. Freuchet, T. Magot, M. Krempf,
      P. Nguyen and K. Ouguerram, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 2010, 334,              30
      334.
 35.	A. Basinger, R. A. Neese, B. Shane, S. A. Myong, M. Christiansen and M.
      K. Hellerstein, Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 2001, 280, 540.
 36.	K. Shibata and S. Toda, Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 1987, 7, 1200.
 37.	A. Lenglet, S. Liabeuf, S. Bodeau, L. Louvet, A. Mary, A. Boullier, A.        35
      Lemaire-Hurtel, A. Jonet, P. Sonnet, S. Kamel and Z. Massy, Toxins,
      2016, 8, 339.
 38.	R. Lang, A. Wahl, T. Skurk, E. F. Yagar, L. Schmiech, R. Eggers, H. Hauner
      and T. Hofmann, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1486.
 39.	J. Gebicki, A. Marcinek, S. Chopicki and J. Adamus, WO Pat. 2008104920        40
      A1, 2008.
 40.	T. Bakuradze, R. Lang, T. Hoffmann, G. Eisenbrand, D. Schipp, J. Galan
      and E. Richling, Eur. J. Nutr., 2015, 54, 149.
 41.	W. I. Holman and D. De Lange, Nature, 1949, 4198, 605.
 42.	H. Bechgaard and S. Jespersen, J. Pharm. Sci., 1977, 66, 871.                 45
456                                                                     Chapter 18
 43.	P. Pfuhl, U. Aringa, A. Baumeistera, M. Archera and M. Schubert-Zsila-           1
      veczb, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2005, 36, 1045.
 44.	P. Pfuhl, Biomed. Anal., 2004, 12, 29.
 45.	M. Iwaki, J. Chromatog. B, Biomed. App., 1994, 11, 4.
 46.	W. A. Perlzweig, F. Rosen, P. B. Pearson, B. J. Peck and P. Sparks, J. Nutr.,    5
      1950, 40, 453.
 47.	P. Reddi and E. Kodicek, Biochem. J., 1953, 53, 286.
 48.	J. Zhou, L. Chan and S. Zhou, Curr. Med. Chem., 2012, 19, 3523.
 49.	J. K. Inamadugu, R. Damaradugu, R. Mullangi and V. Ponneri, Biomed.
      Chromatogr., 2010, 24, 1059.                                                    10
 50.	B. Kalaska, L. Piotrowski, A. Leszczynska, B. Michalowski, K. Kramkow-
      ski, T. Kaminski, J. Adamus, A. Marcinek, J. Gebicki, A. Mogielnicki and
      W. Buczko, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2014, 62, 2853.
 51.	J. Mishkinsky, A. Goldschimied, B. Joseph and Z. Abronson, Arch. Int.
      Phamacodyn. Ther., 1974, 1, 27.                                                 15
 52.	T. D. Spies, C. Cooper and M. A. Blankenhorn, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 1938,
      110, 622.
 53.	G. A. Goldsmith and S. Cordill, Am. J. Med. Sci., 1943, 205, 204.
 54.	The Coronary Drug Project Research Group, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 1975,
      231, 360.                                                                       20
 55.	American Diabetes Association, Diabetes Care, 2014, 37, 1.
 56.	S. E. Khan, R. L. Hull and K. M. Utzschneider, Nature, 2006, 444, 840.
 57.	Y. Nakatani, H. Kaneto, D. Kawamori, K. Yoshiuchi, M. Hatazaki, T. A.
      Matsuoka, K. Ozawa, S. Ogawa, M. Hori, Y. Yamasaki and M. Matsuhisa,
      J. Biol. Chem., 2005, 280, 847–851.                                             25
 58.	A. Margoni, D. Perrea, I. Vlachos, G. Prokopaki and A. Pantopoulou,
      Mol. Med., 2014, 17, 36.
 59.	L. A. Carlson, J. Int. Med., 2005, 258, 94.
 60.	E. Salazar-Martínez, W. C. Willet, A. Ascheiro, J. E. Manson and M. F.
      Stamfer, Ann. Intern. Med., 2004, 140, 1.                                       30
 61.	R. M. van Dam, W. C. Willet and F. B. Hu, Diabetes Care, 2006, 29, 398.
 62.	H. Iso, C. Date, K. Wakai and A. Tamakoshi, Ann. Intern. Med., 2006, 144,
      554.
 63.	S. Oba, C. Nagata and K. Nakamura, Br. J. Nutr., 2010, 103, 453.
 64.	V. Hjellvik, A. Tverdal and H. Strom, Epidemiology, 2011, 22, 418.              35
 65.	A. Floegel, T. Pischon, M. Bergmam, B. Tencher, R. Kaaks and H. Boe-
      ing, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2012, 95, 901.
 66.	M. Ding, S. N. Bhupathiraju, M. Chen, R. M. van Dam and F. B. Hu, Dia-
      betes Care, 2014, 37, 569.
 67.	K. L. Johnston, M. N. Clifford and L. M. Morgan, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2003,      40
      78, 728.
 68.	J. Shearer, A. Farah, T. de Paulis, D. P. Bracy, R. R. Pencek and T. E. Gra-
      ham, J. Nutr., 2003, 133, 3529.
 69.	F. Karpe and K. N. Frayn, Lancet, 2004, 363, 1892.
 70.	S. Furukawa, T. Fujita, M. Shimabukuro, M. Iwaki, Y. Yamada and Y.              45
      Nakajima, J. Clin. Invest., 2004, 114, 1752.
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                      457
 71.	J. Zhou, S. Zhou and S. Zeng, Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol., 2013, 27, 279.             1
 72.	J. Rios, F. Francini and G. Schinella, Planta Med., 2015, 81, 975.
 73.	K. Kempf, C. Herder, I. Erlund, H. Kolb, S. Martin, M. Carstensen, W.
      Koenig, J. Sundvall, S. Bidel, S. Kuha and J. Tuomilehto, Am. J. Clin.
      Nutr., 2010, 91, 950.                                                              5
 74.	A. E. Van Dijk, M. R. Olthof, J. C. Meeuse, E. Seebus, R. J. Heine and R.
      M. van Dam, Diabetes Care, 2009, 32, 1023.
 75.	C. Landau, Y. D. Chen, R. Skowronski, C. B. Hollenbeck, J. B. Jaspan and
      G. M. Reaven, Horm. Metab. Res., 1992, 24, 424.
 76.	O. Peroni, V. Large and M. Beylot, Am. J. Physiol., 1995, 269, 516.               10
 77.	E. O. Balasse and M. A. Neef, Metabolism, 1973, 22, 1193.
 78.	J. P. Felber and V. Buber, in Metabolic Effects of Nicotinic Acid and Its
      Derivatives, ed. K. F. Gey and L. A. Carlson, Huber, Bern, Switzerland,
      1970, p. 695.
 79.	A. Garg and S. M. Grundy, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 1990, 264, 723.                     15
 80.	T. A. Miettinen, M. R. Taskinen, R. Pelkonen and E. A. Nikkila, Acta Med.
      Scand., 1969, 186, 247.
 81.	X. Chen and A. J. Wood, Biol. Plant., 1999, 48, 531.
 82.	M. S. Pinzur, Foot Ankle Clin., 2011, 16, 345.
 83.	M. Al-Habori, A. Raman, M. Lawrence and P. Skett, Int. J. Exp. Diabetes           20
      Res., 2001, 2, 91.
 84.	M. R. Olthof, A. Van Dijk, C. F. Deacon, R. J. Heine and R. M. van Dam,
      Nutr. Metab., 2011, 8, 10.
 85.	J. Zhou, S. Zhou and S. Zeng, Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol., 2011, 3, 1.
 86.	P. Poirier, T. D. Giles, G. A. Bray, Y. Hong, J. S. Stern, F. X. Pi-Sunyer and    25
      R. H. Eckel, Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 2006, 26, 1968.
 87.	T. Suganami, J. Nishida and Y. Ogawa, Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.,
      2005, 25, 2062.
 88.	M. J. Peterson, C. C. Hillman and J. Ashmore, Mol. Pharmacol., 1968, 4, 1.
 89.	L. A. Carlson and A. Hanngren, Life Sci., 1964, 3, 867.                           30
 90.	R. Altschul, A. Hoffer and J. D. Stephen, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1955,
      54, 558.
 91.	R. H. Knopp, N. Engl. J. Med., 1999, 341, 498.
 92.	J. J. Kelly, J. A. Lawson, L. V. Campbell, L. H. Storlien, A. B. Jenkins, J. A.
      Whitworth and A. J. O'Sullivan, J. Hum. Hypertens., 2000, 14, 567.                35
 93.	A. Gille, E. T. Bodor, K. Ahmed and S. Offermanns, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol.
      Toxicol., 2008, 48, 79.
 94.	A. Zambon, J. E. Hokanson, B. G. Brown and J. D. Brunzell, Circulation,
      1999, 99, 1959.
 95.	J. M. McKenney, L. S. McCormick, E. J. Schaefer, D. M. Black and M. L.            40
      Watkins, Am. J. Med., 2001, 88, 270.
 96.	National Institutes of Health, http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-informa-
      tion/diabetes/overview/symtoms-causes, (last acessed in January 2017).
 97.	B. G. Brown and X. Q. Zhao, Am. J. Cardiol., 2008, 101, S58.
 98.	P. L. Canner, K. G. Berge and N. K. Wenger, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., 1986, 8,       45
      1245.
458                                                                      Chapter 18
 99.	P. L. Canner, C. D. Furberg and M. E. McGovern, Am. J. Cardiol., 2006, 97,        1
      477.
100.	S. Westphal, K. Borucki, E. Taneva, R. Makarova and C. Luley, Atheroscle-
      rosis, 2007, 193, 361.
101.	E. P. Plaisance, M. Lukasova, S. Offermanns, Y. Zhang, G. Cao and R. L.           5
      Judd, Am. J. Physiol., 2009, 296, 549.
102.	A. Linke, M. Sonnabend, M. Fasshauer, R. Hollriegel, G. Schuler, J. Nie-
      bauer, M. Stumvoll and M. Bluher, Atherosclerosis, 2009, 205, 207.
103.	A. Chait, R. L. Brazg, D. L. Tribble and R. M. Krauss, Am. J. Med., 1993,
      94, 350.                                                                         10
104.	M. Navab, S. Y. Hama and C. J. Cooke, J. Lipid Res., 2000, 41, 1481.
105.	S. Parthasarathy, J. Barnett and L. G. Fong, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1990,
      1044, 275.
106.	J. L. Mehta and L. Y. Chen, J. Lab. Clin. Med., 1996, 127, 287.
107.	A. M. Armstrong, J. E. Chestnutt, M. J. Gormley and I. S. Young, Free            15
      Radical Biol. Med., 1996, 21, 719.
108.	D. Loomis, K. Z. Guyton, Y. Grosse and B. Lauby-Secretan, Lancet Oncol.,
      2016, 17, 7.
109.	S. L. Friedman, J. Hepatol., 2003, 38, 38.
110.	P. Muriel, Hepatotoxicity: From Genomics to In Vitro and In Vivo Models,         20
      John Wiley and Sons Ltd, West Sussex, UK, 2007, pp. 371–389.
111.	G. Gurujeyalakshmi, S. N. Iyer, M. A. Hollinger and S. N. Giri, J. Pharma-
      col. Exp. Ther., 1996, 277, 1152.
112.	G. Gurujeyalakshmi, M. A. Hollinger and S. N. Giri, Am. J. Respir. Cell
      Mol. Biol., 1998, 18, 334.                                                       25
113.	A. Traister, I. Breitman, E. Bar-Lev, I. Zvibel, A. Harel, Z. Halpern and R.
      Oren, J. Gastroenterol., 2005, 40, 1226.
114.	J. Jin, B. L. Kyong, Y. P. Soo and J. J. Jang, Virchows Arch., 2011, 458, 689.
115.	M. Mirzaie, M. Khallil, Z. Kiasalari and M. Roghani, Neurophysiology,
      2016, 48, 176.                                                                   30
116.	C. Tohda, N. Nakamura, K. Komatsu and M. Hatton, Biol. Pharm. Bull.,
      1999, 7, 679.
117.	K. Flynn, BioArchitecture, 2013, 4, 86.
118.	J. Massano and K. P. Bhatia, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Med., 2012, 6,
      1.                                                                               35
119.	R. Fisher, W. Van Emde, W. Blume and C. Elger, Epilepsia, 2005, 46, 470.
120.	G. Czok, Arch. Sci. Med., 1974, 131, 15.
121.	E. Previtali, P. Bucciarelli, S. Passamonti and I. Martinelli, Blood Trans-
      fus., 2011, 9, 120.
122.	M. Lyaker, D. Tulman, G. Dimitrova, R. Pin and T. Papadimos, Int. J. Crit.       40
      Illness Inj. Sci., 2013, 3, 77.
123.	S. Chlopicki, J. Suves, A. Mogiehnid, W. Buczko and M. Bates, Br. J. Phar-
      macol., 2007, 152, 230.
124.	M. Rubach, R. Lang, E. Seebach, M. Somoza, T. Hofmann and V. Somoza,
      Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2012, 56, 325.                                             45
Potential Effects of Trigonelline and Derivatives on Health                   459
125.	M. Rubach, R. Lang, C. Skupin, T. Hofmann and V. Somoza, J. Agric. Food         1
      Chem., 2010, 58, 4153.
126.	P. Antonisamy, M. Arasu, M. Dhanasekaran and J. Kim, Food Funct.,
      2015, 7, 398.
127.	A. Almeida, A. Farah, D. Silva, F. Nunan and M. Gloria, J. Agric. Food          5
      Chem., 2006, 54, 8738.
128.	B. Özçelik, M. Kartal and I. Orhan, Pharm. Biol., 2011, 49, 396.
129.	A. Antonio, R. Moraes, D. Perrone, L. Maia, K. Santos, N. Iório and A.
      Farah, Food Chem., 2010, 118, 782.
130.	F. Da Silva, N. Iório, L. Lobo, K. Santos, A. Farah, L. Maia and A. Antonio,   10
      Adv. Microbiol., 2014, 4, 978.



                                                                                     15




                                                                                     20




                                                                                     25




                                                                                     30




                                                                                     35




                                                                                     40




                                                                                     45
