January, 2017 
Page 1 
 
SCMA ACCREDITATION CRITERIA 
The Accreditation Criteria are divided into three levels.  
To achieve Provisional Accreditation, a two year term, providers must comply with 
Criteria 1, 2, 3, and 7–12 
Providers seeking full Accreditation or reaccreditation for a four-year term must 
comply with Criteria 1–13 
To achieve Accreditation with Commendation, a six-year term, providers must 
comply with (Option A)  all Criteria 1-22 or  (Option B) Selected Criteria 23 – 36  
-  Choose (at least) 7 from any category, and choose at least 1 from “Achieves 
Outcomes” category - C-36 – C38 
 
Criterion 1  
The provider has a CME mission statement that includes expected results articulated in 
terms of changes in competence, performance, or patient outcomes that will be the result 
of the program.  
 
Criterion 2  
The provider incorporates into CME activities the educational needs (knowledge, 
competence, or performance) that underlie the professional practice gaps of their own 
learners.  
 
Criterion 3  
The provider generates activities/educational interventions that are designed to change 
competence, performance, or patient outcomes as described in its mission statement.  
 
Criterion 4  
This criterion has been eliminated effective February 2014.  
 
Criterion 5  
The provider chooses educational formats for activities/interventions that are 
appropriate for the setting, objectives, and desired results of the activity.  
 
 
 
 

January, 2017 
Page 2 
 
Criterion 6  
The provider develops activities/educational interventions in the context of desirable 
physician attributes [eg, Institute of Medicine (IOM) competencies, Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) Competencies].  
 
Criterion 7  
The provider develops activities/educational interventions independent of commercial 
interests. (SCS 1, 2, and 6).  
 
Criterion 8  
The provider appropriately manages commercial support (if applicable, SCS 3 of the 
ACCME Standards for Commercial Support ).  
 
Criterion 9  
The provider maintains a separation of promotion from education (SCS 4).  
 
Criterion 10  
The provider actively promotes improvements in health care and NOT proprietary 
interests of a commercial interest (SCS 5).  
 
Criterion 11  
The provider analyzes changes in learners (competence, performance, or patient 
outcomes) achieved as a result of the overall program's activities/educational 
interventions.  
 
Criterion 12  
The provider gathers data or information and conducts a program-based analysis on the 
degree to which the CME mission of the provider has been met through the conduct of 
CME activities/educational interventions.   
 
Criterion 13  
The provider identifies, plans and implements the needed or desired changes in the 
overall program (eg, planners, teachers, infrastructure, methods, resources, facilities, 
interventions) that are required to improve on ability to meet the CME mission.  
 
Criterion 14  
This criterion has been eliminated effective February 2014.  
 
Criterion 15  
This criterion has been eliminated effective February 2014.  

January, 2017 
Page 3 
 
Accreditation with Commendation - Option A 
 
Criterion 16  
The provider operates in a manner that integrates CME into the process for improving 
professional practice.  
 
Criterion 17  
The provider utilizes non-education strategies to enhance change as an adjunct to its 
activities/educational interventions (e.g., reminders, patient feedback). 
  
Criterion 18  
The provider identifies factors outside the provider's control that impact on patient 
outcomes.  
 
Criterion 19  
The provider implements educational strategies to remove, overcome or address barriers 
to physician change.  
 
Criterion 20  
The provider builds bridges with other stakeholders through collaboration and 
cooperation.  
 
Criterion 21  
 
The provider participates within an institutional or system framework for quality 
improvement.  
 
Criterion 22  
The provider is positioned to influence the scope and content of activities/educational 
interventions.  
 
 
 
 
 

January, 2017 
Page 4 
 
Menu of New Accreditation with Commendation - Option B  
Choose 7 from any category; and must choose (at least) 1 from “Achieves Outcomes” category 
Promotes Team-Based Education - Category 
 
Criterion 23  
Members of inter-professional teams are engaged in the planning and delivery of inter-
professional continuing education (IPCE).  
 
Criterion 24  
Patient/public representatives are engaged in the planning and delivery of CME.  
 
Criterion 25  
Students of the health professions are engaged in the planning and delivery of CME. 
  
Addressed Public Health Priorities – Category 
 
Criterion 26  
The provider advances the use of health and practice data for healthcare improvement.  
 
Criterion 27  
The provider addresses factors beyond clinical care that affect the health of populations.  
 
Criterion 28  
The provider collaborates with other organizations to more effectively address 
population health issues. 
  
Enhances Skills - Category 
 
Criterion 29  
The provider designs CME to optimize communication skills of learners. 
  
Criterion 30  
The provider designs CME to optimize technical and procedural skills of learners.  
 
Criterion 31  
The provider creates individualized learning plans for learners.  
 
Criterion 32  
The provider utilizes support strategies to enhance change as an adjunct to its CME.  

January, 2017 
Page 5 
 
Demonstrates Educational Leadership – Category  
 
Criterion 33  
The provider engages in CME research and scholarship.  
 
Criterion 34  
The provider supports the continuous professional development of its CME team.  
 
Criterion 35  
The provider demonstrates creativity and innovation in the evolution of its CME 
program.  
 
Achieves Outcomes– Category  
Must choose (at least) 1 from this category 
 
Criterion 36  
The provider demonstrates improvement in the performance of learners.  
 
Criterion 37  
The provider demonstrates healthcare quality improvement.  
 
Criterion 38  
The provider demonstrates the impact of the CME program on patients or their 
communities.  
