See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280882994
Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Allelopathic effects of
aromatic species intercropped with coffee: Investigation of their growth
stimulation capacity and potential...
Article  in  Allelopathy Journal · August 2015
CITATIONS
0
READS
1,049
3 authors:
Juergen Pohlan
University of Bonn
150 PUBLICATIONS   367 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Pacheco Bustos
Earth University
3 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Margot Schulz
University of Bonn
158 PUBLICATIONS   3,370 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Juergen Pohlan on 08 February 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

0971-4693/94 US $ 5.00 
Allelopathy Journal 21 (1): xx-xx (2008)                       © International Allelopathy Foundation 2008 
Table: 1, Figs : 8 
Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with 
coffee: Investigation of their growth stimulation capacity and 
potential of caffeine uptake in Puebla, Mexico 
 
A. PACHECO1, J. POHLAN* and M. SCHULZ2 
 
Colegio de de la Frontera Sur, ECOSUR,  
Post Box. 36, 30700 Tapachula, Chiapas, México.  
E. Mail: drjpohlan@excite.com 
 
(Received in revised form: November 17, 2007) 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this study, the potential uptake of caffeine by spearmint (Mentha piperita L.), basil 
(Ocimum basilicum L.), sage (Salvia officinalis L.), and oregano (Origanum vulgare L.) and 
conversely, the allelopathic effects of these herbs on physiological parameters in coffee 
(Coffea arabica L.) were investigated. Two ecological conditions in rural area of Puebla 
State, Mexico (2004-2005), as well as laboratory bioassays were evaluated. To summarize 
the results: (i). Intercropping sage, spearmint, basil and oregano stimulated the plagiotropic 
growth of Coffea arabica plants. (ii). Volatiles from essential oils induced stomata opening 
in coffee leaves. (iii).  Aromatic species, principally sage and oregano absorbed caffeine and 
may contribute to reductions of the caffeine contamination of the soil. (iv).  Finally, coffee 
growers can get extra income by intercropping aromatic plants during the no-harvest period 
(April –November) in between coffee rows of young production systems. 
 
Key Words:  Allelopathy, aromatic herbs, caffeine uptake, intercropping systems, coffee (Coffea arabica L.), 
spearmint (Mentha piperita L.), basil (Ocimum basilicum L.), oregano (Origanum vulgare L.), sage 
(Salvia officinalis L.). 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Aromatic plants have been used as raw materials to extract essential oils, for the 
flavour and fragrance industries as well as spices, herbs and traditional medicines, 
pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, botanical pesticides, insect repellents and herbal tea/drinks. 
Intercropping aromatic plants provides some advantages such as weed control, nutrient 
recycling, low-external input farming and extra income (9,11). The coffee growers that 
have confronted the recent decrease in coffee prices have begun to diversify their coffee 
plantations with intercalated crops, such as timber, ginger (Zingiber officinale L.), vanilla 
(Vanilla planifolia L.), pepper (Piper nigrum L.), exotic flowers, etc. The planter’s 
community has generated an interest in aromatic plants in the last years due to demand of 
these profitable products in the international market. The technical knowledge needed to 
produce high quality herbs is quite basic and the possibility of introducing them into the 
environmental conditions under coffee systems is high (10,11,14).  
To evaluate this intercropping system, it is important to consider many secondary 
compounds synthesized by aromatic plants and coffee (Coffea arabica L.), which cause  
 
*Correspondence author 1EARTH University – Guácimo, Limón – Costa Rica; 2Rheinische Friedrich – Wilhelms 
-Universität Bonn, Institute of Plant Molecular Physiology and Biotechnology (IMBIO), D-53115 Bonn, 

Pacheco et al 
 
2 
allelopathic effects. Essential oils rich in phenolic complexes and a wide array of other 
natural products, including polyphenols such as flavonoids and anthocyanins produced by 
aromatic plants, cause allelopathic effects that can inhibit plant growth or otherwise 
influence surrounding plants (12,13). A group of phenolics (namely benzoic and cinnamic 
acids), present in aromatic plants are potent inhibitors of K and P absorption. The 
inhibitory capacity of the benzoic acids is strongly correlated with the lipid solubility of 
the cell membrane, modifying its permeability and thereby increasing the rate of exchange 
(3). The impact of these aromatics on cell membranes can result in non-specific 
permeability changes that alter ion fluxes and hydraulic conductivity of roots. Membrane 
perturbations are followed by a cascade of secondary physiological effects that include 
alterations in ion balance, plant-water relationships, stomatal function, and rates of 
photosynthesis and respiration (4,17). In addition, allelopathic and auto-toxic effects of 
coffee have been reported due to toxic caffeine accumulation in coffee plantations. This 
alkaloid is powerful that inhibits mitosis in the roots and thereby reduces access to 
nutrients and water. Caffeine is also known to release calcium of the affected plant that 
may disturb the organization of new cells and tissue. Moreover, caffeine can destabilize 
nucleic acids by intercalation (1). 
In a previous study, we found that some aromatic species (sage and oregano) are 
able to absorb caffeine (unpublished data). The alkaloid was mainly found in the roots, 
whereas, only traces were present in the stems and leaves. Based on these results, four 
aromatic species, spearmint, basil, oregano and sage, were evaluated as safe potential 
intercrops in coffee plantations and their potential to absorb caffeine were now intensively 
studied. If some aromatic species can absorb caffeine, they may help to diminish toxic 
accumulation of caffeine in old coffee plantations. 
Most of the allelopathic experiments were designed in such a way that only the 
inhibitory results are considered significant. The scientists have become more aware of the 
significance of the chemical stimulation of growth and development of plants by other 
plants volatiles or interactions. Instances of allelopathic stimulation of coffee plants by 
intercropping herbs are the result of previous experiences from the same research group 
during 2003 in Chiapas, Mexico (10,11). In this study, the potential stimulation of coffee 
plant growth due to exposure to volatile essential oils (VEOs) emitted from intercropped 
aromatic plants was investigated.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Laboratory bioassays 
 
Caffeine uptake by herbs 
To ascertain that caffeine is taken up and translocated by aromatic plants and 
looking for physiological effects, these species were exposed to a specific concentration of 
caffeine under controlled conditions. Four species of aromatic plants (spearmint, basil, 
sage, and oregano) were germinated from commercial seeds (Sperli seeds) in 20 x 40 x 5 
cm trays under greenhouse conditions using a mixture of 1 part (200 g) of potting soil and 
2 parts (400 g) of peat moss. The trays were watered as needed and maintained at 
continuous temperature (25-28 °C). 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
3
Twenty seedlings per specie, six-weeks-old, were transferred into four glass 
beakers (500 ml) with their root systems submerged into 500 µM caffeine solutions in 250 
ml incubation medium, prepared as described (7) but with caffeine instead of 
benzoxazolinone. One control was incubated in the absence of caffeine, using the same 
incubation medium and four plants per specie. Exposure times were 24, 48 and 72 h. The 
beakers were closed with parafilm (Pechiney PM996) to prevent evaporation of the 
medium and artificially aerated using a 100L/h Hagen air pump Elite 8001 and a 0. 02 m 
diameter rubber hose.  
To estimate the uptake of caffeine in the aromatic plants, aerial parts (shoot and 
leaves) and roots were harvested separately. After washed, using distilled water to 
eliminate the external excess of medium, the plant material was weighed and 2 g 
individual samples were ground and homogenized with 50% methanol (v/w 2/1) and 
quartz sand in a mortar and pestle. The mixture was filtered through Miracloth and 
centrifuged at 4 ºC and 14000 gn for 20 min. 
The supernatants were collected. Samples of the medium after uptake were 
analyzed to estimate the remaining caffeine content. Identity and quantity of the 
compounds present in different plant tissues was established by methanolic extraction and 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) analysis. 
 
Release of caffeine by aromatic plants 
To  determine the possible caffeine release after uptake, six-week-old plants after 
48 h incubation with caffeine (as described above) were analyzed. Four plants per species 
were placed in 500 ml beakers with 200 ml aerated (using a 100L/hr Hagen air pump Elite 
8001 and a 0.02 m diameter rubber hose) tap water. After 24 and 48 h the total volume of 
water was replaced with fresh water. The water containing released products was 
evaporated under vacuum using a rotoevaporator. The remaining residue was then 
dissolved in 1 ml 70 % methanol and the solution centrifuged at 4 ºC and 14000 gn for 15 
min. The supernatant was used for high performance liquid column chromatography 
(HPLC) analysis. 
To determine if there are alkaloid residues in treated plant materials after 72 h, 
roots, shoot and leave from one plant were separated and 1 g tissue samples were 
homogenized with 50 % methanol (v/w 2/1) and quartz sand. Three repetitions were made. 
The mixture was filtered through Miracloth (Calbiochem) and centrifuged for 20 min at 
14000 gn. The supernatant was then subjected to HPLC analyses. 
 
HPLC analysis  
HPLC analyses were performed using a Beckman 126 chromatograph equipped 
with photo diode array detector 168 and an ultrasphere ODS RP 18 column. Solutes were 
eluted with a gradient: 0-20 % B in A for 1 min - 20- B in 100% A in 20 min - 20 min 
100% B, using 0.1% TFA (Sigma) in H2O as eluent A and methanol (Baker) as eluent B at 
a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The wavelengths monitored for UV detection were 280 and 227 
nm. Absorbed caffeine was identified by co-chromatography with a synthetic caffeine 
standard (Roth) and also by UVspectroscopy (A max = 210, 273). 
 

Pacheco et al 
 
4 
Influence of volatiles on coffee leaf stomata aperture 
Four- weeks old single plants of each aromatic species were placed into glass 
containers (20 L Vol) under air controlled conditions, together with a sixth month old C. 
arabica plant. Coffee plants to be used as controls were placed under similar conditions 
but without exposure to aromatic plants. Small ventilators inside of the glass containers 
guaranteed air circulation. Plants were placed in a phytotron and watered as needed. 
Leaves of three selected plant portions (lower = 0-7 cm, middle = 7-14 cm and higher = up 
14 cm height) were harvested after 24, 48 and 72 h of exposure to volatiles of aromatic 
plants. Abaxial leaf surfaces were then covered with transparent tape; while the upper parts 
of the leaves (adaxial surface) were stripped using a scalpel blade and sections of the 
mesophyll carefully removed. The tapes with the epidermis of the lower leaf surfaces were 
adhered to a slide and immediately used for microscopic measurements of stomatal 
aperture (Olympus BH2 with photographic equipment PM10 AD). A 60x ocular SWHK 
was used for calibration. 
Observations of the stomatal aperture of the leaves (n=50) of nine leaves per plant 
(three in each level) were noted and the means statistically analyzed using SPSS 12.0 
software (One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s test at 95 % confidence). 
 
Field Research  
 
Interaction of aromatic plants in coffee production systems  
The experimental areas were located in the rural area of Xicotepec de Juarez, a 
coffee production area of the Puebla State, Mexico. Two different farms, the first called 
“La Providencia”, located at 20° 16' 295'' N and 97° 50' 456'' W with an altitude of 900 m 
above sea level; and the second “La Orquidea” located at 20° 16', 887'' N and 97° 45' 600'' 
W with an altitude of 550 m above sea level, were chosen. The experiments were 
established and evaluated between November 2004 and December 2005. 
 
Ecological conditions 
Annual mean temperature varies strongly (18-24 C) and is dependant upon 
altitude in the experimental area (between 550 and 900 m.a.s.l.). Annual mean 
precipitation for the region is estimated to be 2765 mm and 80% of the rainfall occurs in 
the period between June and October. The farms were of 100 ha (Providencia farm) and 80 
ha (Orquidea farm), of which < 15% was natural forest. Pest and diseases were controlled 
efficiently using sustainable management techniques.  
Three commercial fields on each farm with different geographical orientation (to 
minimize the effect of radiation and slope) (2) were chosen as experimental plots. The 
plots designated as “new” were commercial coffee production areas with approximately 5 
years of establishment, those designated as “medium” were 10 years old and the “old” 
plantations were those cropped for over 20 years in coffee monoculture. Four repetitions of 
different age plot were evaluated per farm. 
Four species of aromatic plants (sage, oregano, basil and spearmint) and one 
control without aromatic plants were tested as intercrops in three coffee systems of various 
ages. The treatments were planted between coffee rows. Randomized complete block 
design with four replications of each treatment per plot were evaluated. Areas of 12 m2 
(6m x 2m) were utilized as experimental units, leaving spaces of 8m2 (4m x 2m) between 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
5
treatments. Commercial seeds (Sperli) from spearmint, basil, sage and oregano were 
germinated in trays under homogeneous conditions. Four-week-old plants were 
transplanted in the field, between rows of coffee, at the same density (4 plants per m2). 
Established planting were treated six times over the course of the season with 
various fertilizers. The first treatment was 500 g/plant of compost at transplantation, the 
second three weeks after transplanting (50g/plant 23-0-8 NPK ratio) and the remaining 
four treatments were performed after every harvest, by adding 100 ml/plant of soluble 
commercial fertilizer (Hydro 17-17-17). The control plot was equally fertilized. No pest or 
disease control was performed on the treatments and additional management such as 
irrigation was not required. The coffee plants were pruned after the first harvest (as in 
traditional management) and fertilized two times per year with soluble commercial product 
(200 ml/plant Hydro 46-15-15). Hypothenemus hampei (Scolytidae) ‘coffee berry borer’ 
was the only pest controlled through use of pheromone traps (17 traps/ ha ). 
To evaluate the effect of the herbs on coffee growth, four plants in each treatment 
were marked and their growth parameters were evaluated bimonthly. Two primary 
plagiotropic branches (10th and 20th) from the upper third of the plant canopy were tagged 
in each treatment unit for periodical sampling of length and number of leaves. The details 
of wxperiments and treatments are given in following Table:  
 
Factor A: Influence of presence of aromatic plants on growth and development of coffee.  
 
Treatment 
Details of treatment 
Parameters studied/ Observations 
A1 
Coffee 
sole 
under 
traditional 
management 
(cultural control of weeds and fertilization of 
coffee plants) 
Plagiotropic growth (cm) and 
vegetative growth per marked 
branch (cm) and appearance of 
new leaves per plant. 
A2 
Coffee with basil 
A3 
Coffee with spearmint 
A4 
Coffee with sage 
A5 
Coffee with oregano 
 
Factor B: Effects of coffee age plantation on accumulation of caffeine and yield of 
aromatic plants.  
 
Treatment 
Details of treatment 
Parameters studied/ Observations 
B1 
New plantation (5 years old) 
The yield of herbs per m² during the rapid 
growth phase of coffee plants. Four 
harvests yields were recorded during the 
evaluation period 
B2 
Medium aged plantation (10 years old) 
B3 
Old plantation (> 20 year old) 
 
SPSS 12.0 was used for statistical analysis of the data. The data was subjected to 
ANOVA and when the F test was significant, the means were compared using Tukey’s test 
at 95 % confidence. 
 
Effects of aromatic plants on coffee cup quality 
For the cup quality test, an assessment of perception of coffee quality was 
evaluated. A sensorial evaluation (cup tasting) of the coffee form the different treatments 
were done by 3 professional tasters at a private coffee roaster (Coffee Star), in Berlin, 

Pacheco et al 
 
6 
Germany, in June 2006. A panel of experienced cup tasters was served coffee made from 
different sample plots. Samples of 5 kg were collected randomized from the treated coffee 
plots. All the samples were dried to 12 % humidity and then roasted and milled uniformly. 
The major taste and flavour attributes, aroma, body, bitterness and acidity were scored 
using the beverage quality denominations ranging from 0 to 7 where 0 = nil, 1 = very light, 
2 = light, 3 = medium, 4 = medium strong , 5 = strong, 6 = very strong and 7 = too strong. 
An additional, overall preference score for beverage quality is based on the above 
attributes and also ranged from 0 to 7, where 0 = unacceptable, 1 =very bad, 2 = bad, 3 = 
regular, 4 = acceptable 5 = good, 6 = very good and 7= excellent. All the coffees were 
prepared in advance by pouring boiling water (150 ml) directly onto roasted and ground 
coffee (12 g; mild roast; fine ground) contained in a small cup and performing sensory 
(smell, flavour) evaluation after a few minutes.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Dynamics of caffeine uptake and release by aromatic plants 
The experiments on caffeine uptake revealed that all the species absorbed caffeine 
to significant extent and accumulated this alkaloid mainly in the roots. No evidence of 
detoxification products or of potential biodegradation of caffeine after uptake was detected 
by HPLC. 
All herbs absorbed similar amounts of caffeine over the incubation period of 24 
hours. Sage showed the highest uptake capacity, with 6.92 µmol caffeine absorbed after 24 
hours (Table1). 
Over the next 24 h, sage and oregano continued to accumulate caffeine whereas in 
spearmint, the concentration of the alkaloid increased only slightly. No further absorption 
was observed with basil. Caffeine was only detected in the roots of the aromatic plants, 
except in oregano, where 7.31 µmol were found in the shoots after 48 h of exposure.  
To test the possibility that absorbed caffeine is released back into the environment 
once the roots are no longer in contact with this allelochemical; the plants were transferred 
to tap water for 24, 48 and 72 h. The analysis of the compounds found in the tap water 
after 72 hrs indicated a complete release of caffeine absorbed by basil (both treatments: 24 
and 48 h incubation with caffeine). For spearmint, a complete release was observed only 
following the 24 h-caffeine treatment, whereas after the 48h-treatment, less than 20% of 
the absorbed caffeine was detected in the tap water fraction, suggesting possible 
decomposition in an aqueous medium over time. Oregano released about 33% of the 
caffeine it had absorbed over the 24 h period, but only 2-3% in the 48 h to absorb it. Sage 
(about 5% after the 24 h-treatment and 1.5% after the 48 h-treatment) released the lowest 
amount. Six percent of the absorbed caffeine appeared in the shoots of the sage incubated 
with caffeine for 48 h, after transferring the plants to tap water. After 72 h in tap water, 7% 
and 5% respectively, of the caffeine absorbed by spearmint and oregano over 48 hours was 
found in the shoots. 
The overall balance of caffeine uptake and release indicates a complete release of 
all absorbed caffeine by spearmint after the 24 h treatment with caffeine and by basil after  
 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
7

Pacheco et al 
 
8 
both caffeine-treatment periods (24 and 48 h). With spearmint (48 h-treatment), sage and 
oregano (both treatments) a large portion of the caffeine absorbed was neither released into 
the tap water nor was it extractable from roots, stems or leaves. This could indicate it 
became located in the plant in unextractable forms, or decomposed in the aqueous media 
to undetectable metabolites.  
The capacity of aromatic species to detoxify exogenously supplied caffeine was 
analyzed by quantification of the uptake and release of the alkaloid. The total release of 
caffeine by basil after 24 and 48 h of incubation indicates that active uptake is realized late 
in comparison to spearmint, and especially in comparison to sage and oregano. The data 
suggest potential caffeine metabolism by S. officinalis and O. vulgare since a difference 
greater than 80% in the uptake-release balance of the alkaloid was observed after 24 and 
48h, and only a small amount of the allelochemical was extracted from the biomass after 
72 h of release. The metabolism of purine nucleotides and purine alkaloids (e.g. caffeine) 
has been reviewed in tea and coffee plants (18). Xanthosine is the first methyl acceptor 
from S-adenosylmethionine in caffeine biosynthesis, and is also metabolized by a purine 
degradation pathway via xanthine. In Coffea plants, the rate of caffeine synthesis and 
turnover (i.e. biodegradation and/or biotransformation to xanthine or to methyluric acids) 
differs markedly among species and remains uncertain. Little is known about the caffeine 
biodegradation pathway and further research that can complement results from this study 
remains to be performed. 
As reported (8), purine-related alkaloids, such as caffeine, are translocated in the 
coffee plant and found as constituents of xylem sap. Absorption and translocation were 
regarded as potential mechanisms to remove caffeine from the root tips, which are more 
susceptible to the allelochemical than developing shoots. However, it is likely that basil, 
sage, mint and oregano have a potential mechanism of uptake and translocation of caffeine 
to shoot tissues than does coffee. It would appear that these aromatic plants and probably 
many other species, which have still to be investigated, might be able to diminish soluble 
caffeine in the soil of coffee plantations. As intercrops able to actively take-up caffeine, 
sage and oregano may help in retarding the early degeneration that occurs in coffee 
plantations and is associated with caffeine autotoxicity and release over time.  
 
Effects of volatiles on stomata aperture of coffee leaves  
Stomata of the control coffee plants were closed or showed minimal opening after 
being placed in the desiccators for 24 (more than 50%: 0 - 0.67 µm), 48 (75 %: 0 - 0.67 
µm) and 72 h (more than 85%: 0 - 0.67 µm). The number of closed stomata increased over 
time, probably a reaction to air circulation caused by ventilation or as a regulatory reaction 
to reduce water loss. The presence of oregano increased average stomatal apertures to 46% 
between 4.05 - 4.75 µm after 48 h. Pore sizes decreased after 72 h, but they were still 
larger than after 24 h of exposure, where nearly 50% were almost closed (0 - 0.67 µm). 
Stomatal opening was also promoted by sage volatiles (24 h 50% = 1.35 – 2.02 µm, at 48 h 
was more than 75% between 2.70 -3.35 µm and at 72 h was over 80% = 4.05 µm). Mentha 
piperita volatiles were most effective in promoting stomatal opening. After 24 h exposure 
to spearmint volatiles, more than 60% of observed stomata pore size was higher than 2.70 
µm, after 48 h 80% between 3.37 - 4.05 µm, and after 72 h of exposure, maximal sizes of 
apertures were reached (with several up to 6.75 µm). Long-term exposure also resulted in a 
portion of closed (6%), obviously damaged stomata. 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
9
Volatiles from basil also induced stomatal opening, but prolonged exposure times 
did not further increase the pore size observed (mean averages 24 h = 3.37 µm, 48 h = 4.05 
µm, and 72 h = 4.05 µm). Mean stomatal aperture was highest and increased over the 
entire experimental period with spearmint. Sage volatiles had more of an effect between 48 
and 72 h, than at only 24 hours. An increase of aperture (24 to 48 h) and later closure of 
stomata (48 to 72 h) was observed in the presence of oregano volatiles. No significant 
effect on stomatal opening due to volatiles from basil was observed, though this meant that 
the stomata were open wider after 72 h than those of the control leaves (Fig. 1). 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
24
48
72
Exposition time hr.
 stomatal aperture (x=1,35 um)
oregano
spearmint
sage
basil
control
 
 
Figure 1. Stomata opening means of coffee leaves under influence of volatiles from herbs for the 
evaluation period. 
 
The analyzed data shows that exposure to volatiles of spearmint, sage, oregano 
and basil resulted in an opening of the stomata of coffee plant leaves (Fig. 2). Greater 
stomatal aperture may enhance the influx of CO2 that is required to maintain high 
photosynthetic activity. 
As reported by Schulz et al. (16) there was an increase in stomatal aperture by 
volatiles of Lavandula latifolia, Artemisia camphorata and Mentha piperita in Arabidopsis 
thaliana leaves. Effects on stomata were more pronounced by exposure to the volatiles of 
these species than to mixtures of camphor and menthol, which influenced the growth of 
Arabidopsis leaves positively when applied in low amounts for short periods. As expected, 
a similar reaction was observed in the present study, although different volatile species 
were used. The results indicate that stomatal opening in response to aromatic volatiles may 
be a more general type of response, especially when plants are exposed to monoterpenes or 
other related compounds.  
If volatile oils cause enlargement of stomatal apertures, growth may be 
stimulated, as a higher transpiration rate is to be expected, thereby enhancing  
 

Pacheco et al 
 
10 
 
 
Figure 2. Coffee (Coffea arabica L.) leaf stomata after influence of volatiles from herbs (B = basil, 
M = spearmint, O = oregano, S = sage) and the control (C = no treatment) by different 
times of exposure (24, 48 and 72 h). Size bars are 10 µm for all photos. 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
11
photosynthetic rates. Higher transpiration rates were observed with Arabidopsis thaliana 
exposed to monoterpenes (16). However, the important role of precipitation is to be 
considered too. The superior growth rates observed under low altitude conditions in 
Orquidea Farm could likely be correlated with an increase in temperature and precipitation 
observed during the evaluation period for this experimental site as well. 
 
Stimulatory effect of aromatic plants in the coffee plantations 
The evaluation done in Puebla, México, revealed an increase in branch length of 
coffee when aromatics plants were intercropped. A higher growth rate with mint, oregano 
(about 2 cm/month) was found when compared to control plants (1.3 cm/month). 
Statistical analyses provided significant differences between controls and treatment plants 
where spearmint and oregano were intercropped for the evaluation periods (Feb.-Dec.) at 
the high altitude conditions (Providencia Farm). Thus, no significant difference was 
observed for the other two treatments (basil and sage intercropped) and the means of these 
treatments were superior in comparison to the control for the entire year under evaluation 
(Fig. 3). 
 
40
50
60
70
80
Feb
May
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec
Feb*
May*
Jun*
Aug*
Oct*
Dec*
Orquidea 550 m.a.s.l.
Providencia 900 m.a.s.l.
branch lenght in cm
control
basil 
spearmint 
sage
oregano
 
* Significance difference, P = 0.05 
 
Figure 3. Branch length development of coffee (Coffea arabica L.) under influence of intercropped 
herbs. 
 
No significance differences were observed at lower altitude conditions (Orquidea 
Farm). However, higher means of branch growth in coffee when oregano and spearmint 
were intercropped suggest an important role of those treatments in plagiotropic growth of 
coffee branches. Observations in both ecological conditions (550 and 900 m.a.s.l) show a 
a 
a 
b 
b 
b 

Pacheco et al 
 
12 
higher rate of increase in branch length of coffee plants localized side of the evaluated 
plants, coinciding with the influenced area of volatiles from herbs (Fig. 4).  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Effect of volatiles from herbs on branch growth of coffee (Coffea arabica L.) in Puebla, 
Mexico after 6 months of traditional pruning. The red circle highlight the non-interaction 
zone and the yellow circle the area influenced by volatiles from herbs. 
 
The localized effect on growth stimulation in C. arabica close to the intercropped 
herbs could be related to the important role of volatilization of monoterpenes from herb 
oils into the environment and its effects on neighbour plants. However, further studies on 
the impact of volatiles on coffee and other plants growth will allow us to make more sound 
conclusions. 
A significant difference in the average of number of new leaves was found in 
December 2005 at high altitude (900 m.a.s.l. in Providencia Farm) for the treatments with 
spearmint (36,50 leaves/plant) in comparison with only 24,31 leaves per plant of the 
control. However, although no statistically significant differences were found for the other 
species (basil oregano and sage) at these evaluated conditions; the average of new leaf 
appearance per plant was higher in coffee treatments with aromatic herbs present than in 
the control. For low altitude, although mean appearance of new leaves was higher in 
comparison with the control during the evaluation period, no significant difference was 
found among treatments (Fig. 5).  
A decrease in the development of new coffee leaves was observed in October, 
coinciding with the start of fructification and constrain of nutrient availability for the 
vegetative growth. Highly significant growth stimulation (plagiotropic growth and 
appearance of new leaves) was observed when coffee was intercropped with aromatic 
plants for all experimental plots when compared to the corresponding controls, although 
these differences varied from one system to another. 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
13
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Feb
May
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec
Feb
May
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec*
Orquidea 550 m.a.s.l.
Providencia 900 m.a.s.l.
number of new leaves/ plant
control
basil
spearmint
sage
oregano
 
 
Figure 5.  
Appearance of new leaves per plant in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) under influence of 
intercropped herbs. 
 
The relationships between vegetative and reproductive growth in coffee are rather 
complex and poorly understood. In most regions, rapid vegetative growth and fruit 
development appear to take place at different times. Nevertheless, the positive effect on 
appearance of new coffee leaves and an increase in branch length when intercropped with 
aromatic species is of considerable relevance because flower buds in Arabica coffee are 
initiated on the same wood only once (15), thus the amount of growth produced in the 
current season will determine the crop yield of the following growing season. Therefore, 
additional studies must be performed to compare the yield of coffee plants intercropped 
with aromatic species to that of control plants growing in the absence of them. 
 
Effect of plot age on coffee growth 
A decrease in plagiotropic growth in relation to the age of the plot was observed. 
The average branch growth was less in production systems that had been under 
monoculture for over 10 years than in those that had been established within the last 5 
years.  
Significant differences were observed (Feb.-Dec.) for the means of branch length 
of plots with 5 years of production under high altitude conditions when compared to those 
of older plots (10 and over 20 years of production). 
Development of new leaves was also related to the age of the plots. The decrease 
in the development of new leaves in October, as previously noted, was found in plots of all 
ages (Figs. 6,7). 
b 
a 
b 
b 
b 

Pacheco et al 
 
14 
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Feb
May
Jun
Aug
Oct
Dec
Feb*
May*
Jun*
Aug*
Oct*
Dec*
Orquidea 550 m.a.s.l.
Providencia 900 m.a.s.l.
branch lenght in cm
plot with 5 years of coffee production
plot with 10 years of coffee production
plot with over 20 years of coffee production
 
* Significance difference, P = 0.05  
 
Figure 6.  Branch length development in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) according to age of the 
production system. 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Feb
May
Jun
Aug*
Oct*
Dec*
Feb
May
Jun*
Aug*
Oct*
Dec*
Orquidea 550 m.a.s.l.
Providencia 900 m.a.s.l.
number of new leaves /plant
plot with 5 years of coffee production
plot with 10 years of coffee production
plot with over 20 years of coffee production
 
* Significance difference, P = 0.05 
 
Figure 7. Appearance of new leaves per plant in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) according to age of the 
production system 
a 
b 
b 
a 
b 
b 
a 
b 
b 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
15
Significant differences were observed in the number of new leaves developed, for 
the last six months of the year, under both ecological conditions (550 and 900 m.a.s.l). The 
best average leaf production was seen in the plots with 5 years of production.  
The results of this study suggest that plot age is a limiting factor in coffee growth.  
The best growth rate seen in the different experimental plots, during the period between 
May and June coincides with the highest average rainfall periods. Conversely, growth rate 
decrease coincides with the beginning of the fructification period (October). In summary, 
branch length and the number of new coffee leaves formed were negatively influenced by 
age of plot and the possible accumulation of caffeine in older coffee soils.  
 
Effect of aromatic plants in coffee cup coffee quality 
Coffee quality is understood as a combination of physical characteristics like bean 
size and weight, absence of physical damage and chemical characteristics such as caffeine, 
trigonelline, sucrose and chlorogenic acid content, as well as cup quality, which is a 
combination of aroma, body, acidity, bitterness and others parameters. Among these 
criteria, flavour is the most important criterion for coffee quality evaluation, and the one 
most widely employed in coffee trading (5). Figure 8 presents the impressions that 
professional coffee testers from Coffee Star Berlin had of the coffee produced under 
intercropped systems, using the various herbs tested. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Aroma
Acidity
Body
Flavor
Overall
Scale of evaluation
basil
spearmint
sage
oregano
control
 
 
Figure 8.  Coffee (C. arabica L.) cup quality under proposed intercropped systems. Impression of 
professional tasters, Coffee Star, Berlin (2006) 
 
The best cup quality was obtained with coffee from samples intercropped with 
sage. The overall impression was generally better when coffee was obtained from samples 
intercropped with aromatic plants than from control plots. As opposed to other features 
looked at, body was below or equal to that of the control in samples harvested from coffee 
plants intercropped with herbs. The presence of spearmint also resulted in a higher acidity 
compared to the other treatments and the control. All aromatic plants had a positive effect 

Pacheco et al 
 
16 
on coffee aroma and flavour. The cup quality of coffee could be improved when coffee 
plants are intercropped with oregano, spearmint, basil and sage. 
According to the ecological conditions evaluated (low and high altitude) the 
overall impression was better when coffee was obtained from samples intercropped with 
aromatic plants; the best cup quality was reached with sage intercropped in both altitudes 
when compared to the control. However, in samples harvested from coffee plants 
intercropped with oregano at low altitude, aroma was below that of control. Under the 
same ecological conditions, the presence of oregano also resulted in higher acidity, 
desirable in coffee with low acidity such as Mexican coffee. In all other aromatic plants 
and both controls, acidity was relatively low. All aromatic plants had a positive effect on 
coffee body, though the control under high altitude conditions was deemed best, closely 
followed by sage.  
Sucrose is the principal sugar in coffee, and it acts as an aroma precursor, 
originating several substances (furans, aldehydes, carboxyl acids, etc.) which will affect 
both flavour and aroma of the beverage. Laboratory experiments revealed an increase on 
coffee stomata aperture due to exposure to volatiles from herbs. A potential correlation 
between the field results, where cup quality of coffee was better under treatments with 
herbs and laboratory results may be established. The herb volatiles, through their effect on 
stomata opening, may affect the photosynthetic activity of coffee plants, thereby 
increasing sucrose concentration in coffee beans, and positively affecting cup quality. The 
higher the sucrose contents in green beans, the more intense the coffee cup flavour.  
Studies show that the quality of the beverage is especially associated to the 
altitude of the plots, the rainfall, the soil acidity, the percentage of shade, the yield of the 
trees, and the bean-size (2). During roasting, coffee bean volume increases by half or 
more, but bean mass decreases by a fifth. Moreover, the number of volatile molecular 
species responsible for aroma formation increases from some 250 in green coffee, to more 
than 800 in roasted beans (6). Trigonelline is a pyridine derivative known to contribute 
indirectly to the formation of desirable aromas during roasting (8). Trigonelline is 100% 
soluble in water and therefore will end up in the cup. It is probably the most significant 
constituent contributing to excessive bitterness.  
 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
(i).  Sage and oregano are able to actively take-up caffeine by potentially metabolizing the 
alkaloid. Further research needs to be conducted to identify and determine the 
absorption time and uptake quantity by these species under field conditions.  
(ii).  This study indicates that caffeine absorption is not restricted to coffee plants; that 
other species such as herbs also absorb caffeine, though the mechanisms of 
absorption, release and possibly metabolization of caffeine need to be clarified in 
order to actively use these plants to detoxify and avoid early degeneration of coffee 
soils.  
(iii). Intercropping sage, spearmint, basil and oregano stimulate the plagiotropic growth of 
Coffea arabica plants in evaluated production systems. Furthermore, they induce 
stomatal opening in coffee leaves, which may have a positive influence on the CO2 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
17
fixation when no other limiting factors are present and may increase the 
photosynthetic rates.  
(iv). Although there is a high potential of intercropping basil, sage, spearmint and oregano 
between coffee rows in order to obtain extra income for the non-productive row 
middles, evidence from this study indicates that caffeine can be absorbed by herbs and 
may be a limiting factor for commercialization.  
(v).  Results of this study show that coffee cup quality was associated with altitude, as 
expected. However, association with exposure to volatiles from aromatic plants, 
principally sage, oregano and spearmint, is obviously one of the agricultural factors 
that influence the composition of aroma precursors, showing positive influence, but 
mechanism of action needs to be clarified. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Anaya, A.L., Waller, G.R., Owour, P.O., Friedman J., Chou C.H., Suzuki, T., Arroyo-Estrada J.F. and Cruz-
Ortega R. (2002). The role of caffeine in the production decline due to autotoxicity in coffee and 
tea plantations. In: Allelopathy: From Molecules to Ecosystems (Eds., M. Reigosa and N. Pedrol) 
pp. 71- 91. Science Publishers, Inc. Enfield, USA. 
2. Avelino, J., Barboza, B., Araya, J.C., Fonseca, C., Davrieux, F., Guyot, B. and Cilas, C. (2005). Effects of 
slope exposure, altitude and yield on coffee quality in two altitude terroirs of Costa Rica, Orosi 
and Santa Maria de Dota. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 85: 1869-1876. 
3. Douglas, A. (1992). Effect of methylxanthine treatment on rice seedling growth. Journal of Plant Growth 
Regulation 11: 125-128 
4. Einhelling, F.A. (2004). Mode of allelochemical action of phenolic compounds. In: Allelopathy: Chemistry 
and Mode of Action of Allelochemicals (Eds., F.A. Macias, J.C.G. Galindo, J.M.G. Molinillo., 
H.G. Cutler) pp. 217-238. CRS Press, Boca Raton, USA.  
5. Franca, A.S., Oliveira, L.S., Mendonça, J.C.F. and Silva, X.A. (2005) Physical and chemical attributes of 
defective crude and roasted coffee beans. Food Chemistry 90: 89-94. 
6. Ky, C. L., Louarn, J., Dussert, S., Guyot, B., Hamon, M. and Noirot, M. (2001) Caffeine, trigonelline, 
chlorogenic acids and sucrose diversity in wild Coffea arabica L. and C. canephora P. accessions. 
Food Chemistry 75: 223-230. 
7. Knop, M., Pacyna, S., Voloshchuk, N., Kant, S., Müllenborn, C., Steiner, U., Kirchmair, M., Scherer, H. W. 
and Schulz, M. (2007). Zea mays: Benzoxazolinone detoxification under sulfur deficiency 
conditions -A complex allelopathic alliance including endophytic Fusarium verticillioides. 
Journal of Chemical Ecology 33: 225-237. 
8. Mazzafera, P., Gonçalves, K.V. and Shimizu, M.M. (2002). Extração e dosagem da atividade da 
polifenoloxidase do café. Scientia Agricola 59: 695-700. 
9. Pacheco, A. and Pohlan, J. (2006). El cultivo intercalado de plantas aromáticas y medicinales en cafetales. 
Una oportunidad sana y económica. In: El Cafetal del Futuro: Realidades y Visiones (Eds., J. 
Pohlan, L. Soto, J. Barrera) pp. 211-228. Shaker, Verlag. 
10. Pacheco, A., Goldbach, H., Pohlan, J. and Schulz, M. (2006). Allelopathy effects between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped aromatic plants under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of Puebla, 
Mexico. Tropentag 2006, October 11-13. Conference on International Agricultural Research for 
Development,  Bonn. 
11. Pacheco, A., Pohlan, J., Schulz, M. and Rieser, K. (2006). Efectos aleloquímicos de plantas aromáticas: 
resultados sobre el crecimiento y la calidad del café. X Congreso Internacional de Manejo 
Integrado de Plagas y Agroecología, Tapachula, Chiapas, México, ISBN 9709712225, 
Resúmenes, pp. 13-14. 
12. Phippen, W.B. and Simon, J.E. (1998) Anthocyanins in basil (Ocimum basilicum L.). Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry. 46: 1734–1738. 
13. Phippen, W.B. and Simon, J.E. (2000). Anthocyanin inheritance and instability in purple basil (Ocimum 
basilicum L.) Journal of Heredity 91: 289–296. 

Pacheco et al 
 
18 
14. Pohlan, J., Gamboa Moya, W. and Salazar Centeno, D. (2003). Plantas medicinales y aromáticas como una 
alternativa de cultivo en sistemas agropecuarios del trópico. Documentos Ocasionales No. 2, 
Herbario Universidad de Antioquía, Medellín, Colombia, pp. 27–39. 
15. Rena, A. B., Barros, R.S., Maestri, M. and Söndahl, M.R. (1994). In: Handbook of Environmental 
Physiology of Fruit Crops: Subtropical and Tropical Crops (Eds., B. Schaffer and P.C. Andersen) 
pp. 101-122. CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA. 
16. Schulz, M., Kussmann, P., Knop, M., Kriegs, B., Gresens, F., Eichert, T., Ulbrich, A., Marx, F., Fabricius, 
H., Goldbach, H. and  Noga, G. (2007) Allelopathic monoterpenes attack Arabidopsis thaliana 
cuticular waxes and enhance transpiration. Plant Signaling and Behavior 2: 231:239.  
17. Schulz, M. and Wieland, I. (1999). Variations in metabolism of BOA among species in various field 
communities - biochemical evidence for co-evolutionary processes in plant communities? 
Chemoecology 9: 133-141. 
18. Suzuki, T., Ashihara, H. and Waller, G. (1992). Purine and purine alkaloid metabolism in Camellia and 
Coffea plants. Phytochemistry 31: 2575-2584. 
 

Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee 
 
19
 
View publication stats
