453
12. CHEMICAL FACT SHEETS
Reason for not establishing 
a guideline value
Occurs in drinking-water at concentrations well below those of health 
concern
Assessment date
2003
Principal references
FAO/WHO (2000) Pesticide residues in food—1999 evaluations
WHO (2003) 2-Phenylphenol and its sodium salt in drinking-water
2-Phenylphenol has been determined to be of low toxicity. Both 2-phenylphenol 
and its sodium salt are carcinogenic in male rats, and 2-phenylphenol is carcinogenic 
in male mice. However, urinary bladder tumours observed in male rats and liver 
tumours observed in male mice exposed to 2-phenylphenol appear to be threshold 
phenomena that are species and sex specific. JMPR concluded that 2-phenylphenol 
is unlikely to represent a carcinogenic risk to humans. Although a working group 
convened by IARC classified 2-phenylphenol, sodium salt, in Group 2B (possibly 
carcinogenic to humans) and 2-phenylphenol in Group 3 (not classifiable as to its 
carcinogenicity to humans), JMPR noted that the IARC classification is based on 
hazard identification, not risk assessment, and is furthermore limited to published 
literature, excluding unpublished studies on toxicity and carcinogenicity. JMPR 
also concluded that there are unresolved questions about the genotoxic potential of 
2-phenylphenol.
A health-based value of 1 mg/l can be calculated for 2-phenylphenol on the basis 
of an ADI of 0–0.4 mg/kg body weight, based on a NOAEL of 39 mg/kg body weight 
per day in a 2-year toxicity study on the basis of decreased body weight gain and 
hyperplasia of the urinary bladder and carcinogenicity of the urinary bladder in male 
rats, using an uncertainty factor of 100 for interspecies and intraspecies variation. 
Because of its low toxicity, however, the health-based value derived for 2-phenyl-
phenol is much higher than concentrations of 2-phenylphenol likely to be found in 
drinking-water. Under usual conditions, therefore, the presence of 2-phenylphenol 
in drinking-water is unlikely to represent a hazard to human health. For this reason, 
the establishment of a formal guideline value for 2-phenylphenol is not deemed ne­
cessary.
Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs, form a class of diverse organic com-
pounds each containing two or more fused aromatic rings of carbon and hydro-
gen atoms. Most PAHs enter the environment via the atmosphere from a variety 
of combustion processes and pyrolysis sources. Owing to their low solubility and 
2-Phenylphenol and its sodium salt
2-Phenylphenol (CAS No. 90-43-7) is used as a disinfectant, bactericide and virucide. 
In agriculture, it is used in disinfecting fruits, vegetables and eggs. It is also used as a 
general surface disinfectant in hospitals, nursing homes, veterinary hospitals, poultry 
farms, dairy farms, commercial laundries, barbershops and food processing plants. 
2-Phenylphenol is readily degraded in surface waters, with a half-life of about 1 week 
in river water.
