What is acrylamide? Why is it present in food?
Acrylamide is a chemical that naturally forms in starchy food 
products during every-day high-temperature cooking (frying, 
baking, roasting and also industrial processing at +120°C and low 
moisture). It mainly forms from sugars and amino acids (mainly 
one called asparagine) that are naturally present in many foods. 
The chemical process that causes this is known as the Maillard 
Reaction; it also ‘browns’ food and affects its taste.
An overview of EFSA’s risk assessment: What 
are the risks for consumers of acrylamide in 
food?
In June 2015, EFSA issued a scientific opinion following a 
thorough risk assessment of the public health risks of acrylamide 
in food, and concluded:
▶
▶
Based on animal studies, EFSA confirms previous evaluations 
that acrylamide in food potentially increases the risk of 
developing cancer for consumers in all age groups. 
▶
▶
Since acrylamide is present in a wide range of everyday 
foods, this concern applies to all consumers but children are 
the most exposed age group on a body weight basis.
▶
▶
Possible harmful effects of acrylamide on the nervous 
system, pre- and post-natal development and male 
reproduction were not considered to be a concern, based 
on current levels of dietary exposure.
▶
▶
The most important food groups contributing to acrylamide 
exposure are fried potato products, coffee, biscuits, crackers 
and crisp breads, and soft bread.
▶
▶
The ingredients, storage and processing conditions 
(particularly temperature) greatly influence acrylamide 
formation in food.
▶
▶
Home-cooking choices can have a substantial impact on 
the level of acrylamide humans are exposed to through the 
diet.
▶
▶
What is acrylamide? 
Why is it present in 
food?
▶
▶
An overview of EFSA’s 
risk assessment: 
What are the risks 
for consumers of 
acrylamide in food?
▶
▶
What happens to 
acrylamide in the body?
▶
▶
Is there a “tolerable 
dose” of acrylamide?
▶
▶
What is the margin of 
exposure?
▶
▶
Which foods contribute 
to acrylamide exposure?
▶
▶
Can exposure to 
acrylamide in food be 
reduced?
▶
▶
Is food the only source 
of acrylamide exposure?
▶
▶
What is new about EFSA’s risk 
assessment? Why was it done?
▶
▶
What happens next?
Acrylamide in food
EFSA explains risk assessment

What happens to acrylamide in the body?
Following ingestion, acrylamide is absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract, distributed to all organs and extensively 
metabolised. Glycidamide is one of the main metabolites 
resulting from this process. 
Laboratory animals orally exposed to acrylamide have an 
increased likelihood of developing gene mutations and 
tumours (among others, in rats – mammary gland, testes and 
thyroid gland; and in mice – Harderian and mammary glands, 
lung, ovaries, skin and stomach). Glycidamide is the most likely 
cause of these types of adverse effects in animals. Acrylamide 
exposure can also lead to harmful effects on the nervous system 
(including hind-limb paralysis), pre- and post-natal development 
and adversely affect male reproduction.
Results from human studies provide limited and inconsistent 
evidence of increased risk of developing cancer (of the kidney, 
endometrium and ovaries) in association with dietary exposure 
to acrylamide. An inverse relation between acrylamide exposure 
and birth weight and other markers of fetal growth is reported 
in two studies. EFSA’s experts concluded that more research is 
needed to confirm these results from human studies. Studies 
on workers exposed to acrylamide in the workplace show an 
increased risk of disorders to the nervous system.
Is there a “tolerable dose” of acrylamide?
Acrylamide and its metabolite glycidamide are genotoxic 
and carcinogenic. Since any level of exposure to a genotoxic 
substance could potentially damage DNA and lead to cancer, 
EFSA’s scientists conclude that they cannot set a tolerable daily 
intake (TDI) of acrylamide in food.  
Instead, EFSA’s experts estimated the dose range within which 
acrylamide is likely to cause a small but measurable tumour 
incidence (called “neoplastic” effects) or other potential adverse 
effects (neurological, pre- and post-natal development and 
male reproduction). The lower limit of this range is called the 
Benchmark Dose Lower Confidence Limit (BMDL10).
▶
▶
For tumours, experts selected a BMDL10 of 0.17mg/kg bw/
day 1. 
▶
▶
For other effects, neurological changes were seen as the 
most relevant with a BMDL10 of 0.43 mg/kg bw/day.
By comparing the BMDL10 to human dietary exposure to 
acrylamide, scientists can indicate a “level of health concern” 
known as the margin of exposure.
1  mg/kg bw/day = milligrams per kilogram of body weight per day
What is the margin of exposure?
The margin of exposure (MOE) approach provides an indication 
of the level of health concern about a substance’s presence in 
food without quantifying the risk. Use of the MOE can help risk 
managers in defining possible actions required to keep exposure 
to such substances as low as possible.
EFSA’s Scientific Committee states that, for substances that 
are genotoxic and carcinogenic, an MOE of 10,000 or higher 
is of low concern for public health. The MOEs for the cancer-
related effects of acrylamide range from 425 for average adult 
consumers down to 50 for high consuming toddlers (Table 30, 
page 210). These ranges indicate a concern for public health.
For non-genotoxic substances, an MOE of 100 or higher 
normally indicates no concern for public health. The MOEs 
for neurological effects range from 1,075 for average adult 
consumers to 126 for high consuming toddlers. EFSA’s experts 
concluded that, for these effects, current levels of dietary 
exposure are not a health concern, although for toddlers and 
children with high dietary exposure the MOE is close to the 
values that might be of concern for these effects.

Which foods contribute to acrylamide 
exposure?
The main contributors vary by age:
Adults – fried potato products (including French fries, 
croquettes and roasted potatoes) account for up to 49% of 
average exposure in adults, with coffee (34%) and soft bread 
(23%) the other most important dietary sources for adults, 
followed by ‘biscuits, crackers and crisp breads’ and ‘other 
products based on potatoes’. 
Children (toddlers, other children, adolescents) – potato fried 
products (except potato crisps and snacks) account for up to 51% 
of all dietary exposure. Soft bread, breakfast cereals, biscuits and 
other products based on cereals or potatoes can contribute up 
to 25%. Processed cereal-based baby food represented up to 
14% of exposure for toddlers, cake and pastry up to 15% for other 
children and adolescents, and potato crisps and snacks 11% for 
adolescents.
Infants – ‘baby foods other than processed cereal-based’, ‘other 
products based on potatoes’ and ‘processed cereal-based baby 
food’ (mainly rusks and biscuits) contribute up to 60%, 48% and 
30% respectively.
Although some food categories, for example, ‘potato crisps and 
snacks’ and ‘coffee substitutes’ contain relatively high levels 
of acrylamide, their overall contribution to dietary exposure is 
limited based on a normal/varied diet.
Can exposure to acrylamide in food be 
reduced?
Although not the focus of its risk assessment, EFSA’s experts 
reviewed the available scientific literature and data on how 
the choice of ingredients, the storage method and the 
temperature at which food is cooked influence the amount of 
acrylamide in different food types. An overview is available in 
section 4.4, ‘Impact of raw material, storage and processing on 
acrylamide levels in food’, pp 52-57, of EFSA’s scientific opinion. 
This information could contribute to discussions on how to 
reduce acrylamide exposure from industrial food production, 
restaurants, catering and home cooking.
Is food the only source of acrylamide 
exposure?
No, acrylamide is present in tobacco smoke, which is, therefore, 
a non-dietary source of exposure for smokers and non-smokers 
(through passive smoking). For smokers, tobacco smoking is a 
more prominent source of acrylamide exposure than food. Also, 
acrylamide has a wide variety of industrial non-food uses and, 
therefore, for some people exposure in the workplace through 
dermal absorption or inhalation can occur.
coﬀee /
coﬀee substitutes
potato crisps
/ French fries
soft / crispy
breads
biscuits / cakes
/ rusks

What is new about EFSA’s risk assessment? 
Why was it done?
In September 2012, organisations in Denmark, France, Germany 
and Sweden asked EFSA to consider new scientific findings on 
the possible carcinogenicity of acrylamide. Subsequently, EFSA 
accepted a request from the European Commission to provide 
a scientific opinion on the potential risks for human health of 
acrylamide in food. 
This opinion is EFSA’s first full risk assessment of acrylamide 
in food. The Authority’s experts took into account new 
toxicological studies on acrylamide and glycidamide 
published since the 2005 risk assessments of the World Health 
Organization, as well as more recent studies of acrylamide and 
cancer in humans. The opinion also updates EFSA’s previous 
assessment of dietary exposure to acrylamide (last done in 2011), 
using new data on acrylamide levels in food and more recent 
food consumption data.
In July 2014, EFSA publicly consulted on its draft scientific 
opinion. This allowed EFSA’s experts to refine aspects of its 
assessment of dietary exposure and toxicological studies on 
humans. New studies (covering the period up to March 2015) 
were also appraised following the public consultation.
What happens next?
Currently, EU Member States monitor acrylamide levels in 
food and submit data to EFSA. The European Commission 
recommends that Member States carry out investigations in 
cases where the levels of acrylamide in food exceed so-called 
‘indicative values’ set by the Commission as a guide.
European and national decision-makers will take account 
of EFSA’s scientific advice as well as other considerations in 
weighing up any possible measures to reduce consumer 
exposure to this substance in food.
TM-04-15-337-EN-N
Via Carlo Magno 1A
43126 Parma 
Italy
Tel. 	 + 39 0521 036 111
Fax 	+ 39 0521 036 110
www.efsa.europa.eu
doi:10.2805/90424
ISBN	978-92-9199-685-8
© European Food Safety Authority, 2015. Reproduction is authorised, except for commercial purposes, provided that the source is acknowledged.
Photo credits: EFSA, 
Thinkstock
Glossary :
Maillard Reaction – a chemical reaction between amino acids and reducing sugars that browns food and enhances flavour
Glycidamide – a metabolite of acrylamide that forms after consumption of acrylamide-containing foods
Genotoxic – damages DNA
Carcinogen – causes cancer
Neoplastic effects – tumours, both benign and malignant (i.e. cancer)
Margin of exposure – a ratio of the dose at which a small but measurable adverse effect is first observed and the level of exposure 
for a given population
Benchmark Dose Lower Confidence Limit (BMDL10) – the minimum dose range of a substance that produces a clear, low level 
health risk, usually in the range of a 1-10% change in a specific toxic effect such as cancer induction.
