Page 1 of 1 
‘Good Hygiene Practices along the coffee chain’ 
 
Aflatoxin in Coffee 
 
 
The aflatoxins are a large group of closely related compounds representing 
what is probably the most prominent fungal toxin concern in food and feed. 
They are hepatotoxic carcinogens with a genotoxic mechanism of action. In 
fact, the native compound is not active but it is converted into one of the 
most carcinogenic substances known, by the action of a common enzyme 
system found in the microsomal fraction of cell-free preparations of liver 
cells. 
 
Biosynthetically they are poly-ketides rearranged into five rings. There are 
two principal families as produced (and others as metabolised by animal 
systems). Both have a bis-furan ring system at one end and this is where 
the molecule is activated. Aflatoxin B derivatives have a five membered ring 
at the other end while aflatoxin G derivatives have a six membered ring. 
Immunological methods for the purification of these compounds can exploit 
both this commonality and difference by using one end or the other in 
preparing the antigen, thus directing the specificity of the anti-body. 
 
Aflatoxin is produced by some strains of three species of Aspergillus: the 
very common A. flavus and A. parasiticus and the less common A. wentii. 
Interestingly, many species, including species in other genera, produce 
sterigmatocystin, an aflatoxin pre-cursor which is also toxic and 
carcinogenic. About 20–30% of A. flavus isolates produce aflatoxin, 
typically B-type only, while some 80% of A. parasiticus isolates produce B 
and G-type aflatoxin. The two species are difficult to distinguish from each 
other but A. flavus is widely isolated from coffee1.  
 
Both are fast growing in a similar water activity and Aw range as A. 
ochraceus. Ecologically these fungi were originally thought of as classic 
‘storage fungi’ but this less than useful term is particularly unfortunate in 
this case, since these fungi are known to have very specific interactions 
with several crop plants in the field.  
 
Interest in the presence of aflatoxin in coffee was perhaps diverted by early 
laboratory studies that seemed to show that caffeine prevented aflatoxin 
production. Later work has shown aflatoxin to occur in coffee samples both 
at retail and from traders in amounts and frequency as high as or higher 
than ochratoxin. In other foods, aflatoxin is considered to be heat stable 
surviving the roasting and cooking of nuts and maize - two commodities 
with which it is closely associated. The effect of roasting coffee on aflatoxin 
levels in naturally contaminated coffee is not known though one study 
showed a loss of about ¾ of spiked aflatoxin (at 1880 ppb) after 12 minutes 
at 200-205OC. 
                                                 
1 Nakajima, M., Tsubouchi, H., Miyabe, M., & Ueno, Y. 1997. Food and Ag Immunol. 
9:77-83. Survey of aflatoxin B1 and ochratoxin A in commercial green coffee beans 
by HPLC linked with immunoaffinity chromatography. 
 
Tsubouti, H., Yamamoto, K., Hisada, K., & Sakabe, T. 1984. Pro Japn Ass 
Mycotoxicol, 19: 16-21. A survey of the occurrence of mycotoxins and toxigenic 
fungi in imported green coffee beans. 
 
