See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/289222588
Allelopathic effects of aromatic species intercropped with coffee:
Investigation of their growth stimulation capacity and potential of caffeine
uptake in Puebla, Mexico
Article  in  Allelopathy Journal · January 2008
CITATIONS
8
READS
351
3 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Resilience evaluation of agricultural systems View project
Allelopathic compounds in rye View project
Juergen Pohlan
University of Bonn
149 PUBLICATIONS   325 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Margot Schulz
University of Bonn
152 PUBLICATIONS   3,065 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Juergen Pohlan on 25 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
Interaction between coffee (Coffea arabica L.) and intercropped herbs 
under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of Puebla, Mexico 
Alex Pacheco Bustos*1, H. Jürgen Pohlan2, Margot Schulz3 
 
(1) Rheinische Friedrich – Wilhelms Universität Bonn, Institute for Tropical Crops; D-
50389-Wesseling, Germany alexpacheco30@hotmail. 
(2) Colegio de de la Frontera Sur, ECOSUR, Post Box. 36, 30700 Tapachula, Chiapas, 
México; drjpohlan@excite.; pohlan@tap-ecosur.edu.mx 
(3) Rheinische Friedrich – Wilhelms Universität Bonn, Institute of Plant Molecular 
Physiology and Biotechnology (IMBIO), D-53115  Bonn, Germany; ulp509@uni-
bonn.de 
 
Abstract -.Caffeine released from decaying seeds and leaves accumulates in a 
soluble form in the soil. The compound is known to inhibit mitosis, reduce the 
access of nutrients and water to surrounding plants which is one of limiting 
problems in intercropped coffee plantations. The allelopathic interactions 
between coffee (Coffea arabica L.) and mint (Mentha piperita L.), basil (Ocimum 
basilicum L.), oregano (Origanum vulgare L.) and sage (Salvia officinalis L.) 
could be a diversification alternative and extra income activity for coffee growers 
outside the harvest period that could cope with high levels of caffeine in the soil. 
We tested the interaction of the proposed system (2004 – 2005) in rural area of 
Puebla State, Mexico. The results demonstrate that intercropping sage, 
spearmint, basil and oregano stimulate the plagiotropic growth of Coffea arabica 
plants most effectively in young production systems, through volatile essential 
oils. Intercropping basil, sage, spearmint and oregano in coffee plantations 
seems to be a promising approach for higher income and increasing yield and 
quality production in coffee farms.  
 
Key Words - Allelopathy, herbs, caffeine uptake, intercropping systems, mint, 
oregano, sage, basil. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Coffee production and industry is a significant source of revenue and a source 
of job in rural communities for many countries. The coffee price crisis like 
present day, create social unbalances, instability and migration accelerated to 
urban areas (CARDENAS, 2003; POHLAN, 2002). If crisis continues, coffee 
growers in Latin America will be forced to abandon their cultivations and to look 
for alternative activities, like illegal crops (TORRICO et al., 2004; POHLAN, 2001). 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
Some coffee growers, that confront the crisis, have begun to diversify with 
cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants as intercrops. Intercropped aromatic 
plants provide some advantages like control of weeds, recycling of nutrients, 
use of unproductive areas and extra income. 
Wide arrays of natural products that cause allelopathy are secondary 
compounds synthesized by plants and microorganisms. The compounds belong 
to different chemical classes such as, phenolic acids, tannins, flavonoids, 
terpenoids, alkaloids, steroids, and quinons (DUKE et al., 2000; PHIPPEN and 
SIMON, 2000; EINHELLING and LEATHER, 1988, CHOU, 1980). Phenolics and other 
secondary products, including flavonoids and antocyanins are common 
constituents of aromatic plants. 
On the other hand, caffeine is a biologically active compound found in members 
of the Rubiaceae family, e.g. Coffea arabica that contribute to allelopathic and 
auto toxic effects appearing in coffee plantations (ANAYA et al., 2002). FRIEDMAN 
and WALLER (1983) showed that caffeine inhibits mitosis in lettuce (Lactuca 
sativa L.) roots. As a consequence of restricted development of young roots the 
access of nutrients and water is reduced. The inhibitory effect is thought to be 
finally due to the ability of caffeine to destabilize nucleic acids by intercalation. 
The researchers indicated that caffeine released from decaying seeds and 
leaves accumulates in a soluble form in the soil and is the major reason of auto-
toxicity, one of the principal problems in coffee plantations. Only 150-200 g of 
coffee dry matter has the potential to liberate 1-2 g caffeine/m²/year in addition 
to other components, originating limitations in production. Waller et al. (1986) 
demonstrated that caffeine applied externally was absorbed and translocated by 
the root system of coffee (Coffea arabica, Bourbon variety).  
The interest in aromatic plants has been generated in the last years among the 
planter’s community and the actual demand of these profitable products in the 
international market. Aromatic plants are profitable crops and the possibility to 
introduce them to environmental conditions under coffee systems is high. In 
order to appraise this new alternative and this possible interrelation with coffee, 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
must be consider that allopathic effects are produced by both crops and plant-
plant interaction  need to be defined. 
 
The investigation included the following objectives: 
• Establishment of suitable species for intercropping in a commercial 
production under different seasons and determines if caffeine and other 
compounds released by coffee may have a negative effect on aromatic 
plants. 
• To evaluate if factors like long period of establishment, density, moisture, 
nutrients availability, management of coffee plantations, age of the 
production system, seasonality affect the plant- plant relationship when 
aromatic plants and coffee are intercropped.  
• To evaluate the participation of volatile essential oils in plant-plant 
relationships and possible targets in plant physiology as growth 
stimulant. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Four species of aromatic plants and one control without herbs were tested as 
intercrops in three different age coffee systems at two ecological conditions. 
The first named “Providencia”, located at 20° 16' 295 N and 97° 50' 456 W with 
an altitude of 900 m above sea level and the second named “Orquidea” located 
at 20° 16', 887 N and 97° 45' 600 W with an altitude of 550 m above sea level, 
both in rural area from Xicotepec de Juarez, Puebla, Mexico. 
 
The treatments were planted in-between the coffee rows. Randomized 
complete block design with four repetitions of treatment per plot were 
established. An area of 12m2 (6m*2m) were demarked as experimental units 
leaving a free space among treatments of 8m2 (4m*2m) without influence of 
aromatic herbs. Four weeks old plants of the proposed species sown and 
propagated under homogeneous conditions were planted with a density of 4 
plants per m2, as treatments. For sampling growth variables on coffee, four 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
plants per treatment were marked. Two primary plagiotropic branches (10th and 
20th) from the upper third of the plant canopies were tagged in each treatment 
unit for periodical length measurements and number of leaves evaluation. 
Physiological variables on coffee were evaluated every 2 months. Samples of 
coffee beans from experimental units were collected separately and after 
processed dried to 10 to 12% moisture content. 
No specific agronomical management was required for the herbs. Five 
fertilizations were applied, the first with 500g/plant of compost (no nutritional 
data available) when transplanting and after every harvest 50 g/plant of soluble 
commercial fertilizer (18-18-18 Hydro). No controls on pest or diseases were 
made on the treatments. The coffee plants were pruned after the first harvest 
(as traditional management) and fertilized two times per year with soluble 
commercial product (46-15-15 Hydro). No agronomical management was made 
and the control of Hypothenemus hampei Ferr., was made by using 
pheromones tramps wit a density of 17 tramps/ ha. 
 
Two factors were analyzed in the experiment 
Factor A:  Influence of aromatic plants in physiological development of coffee.  
The following treatments were evaluated 
A1: coffee without aromatic plants  
A2: coffee with Genovese basil 
A3: coffee with spearmint  
A4: coffee with sage 
A5: coffee with oregano 
 
Factor B: Effects of different age coffee systems on yield of aromatic plants 
B1: New plot (5 years of establishment) 
B2: Medium plot (10 years of establishment)  
B3: Old plot (over 20 year of establishment)  
Variables analyzed 
Plagiotropic growth (cm)  

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
Vegetative growth (cm) 
Appearance of new leaves  
 
For the statistical analysis of data, SPSS, 11.0 was used. The data were 
subjected to ANOVA and, when test F is significant, the means were compared 
using Tukey's test at 95% probability.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In every allelopathic relation exists a plant (donor) that frees to the environment 
(atmosphere or rhizosphere) by a specific way, volatilization, leaching, 
decomposition of residues, and root exudation (CHOU, 1986) chemical 
compounds which are absorbed by another plant (receptor) causing a damage 
or beneficial effect. The growth habit and physiological properties of plants can 
differ markedly under different influence of neighbour plants, in this case of 
study, growth stimulation in coffee due to volatilization of essential oils of 
intercropped aromatic plants.  
For the variables of plagiotropic growth in coffee under different ecological 
conditions an increase in branch length when aromatics plants were 
intercropped was found (Figure 1). 
 
 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
Figure 1. Increasing of branch length in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) when intercropping aromatic 
herbs. 
 
 
A significant difference between control and treatments was found in 
Providencia farm, during the whole year, with higher growth rate when mint, 
oregano, sage and basil were intercropped. No significance difference in 
Orquidea farm for this variable was observed but higher means of branch 
growth in coffee when oregano was intercropped elucidated a positive 
stimulation of this treatment.  
Stress in plants causes various physiological and biological changes, one of 
which is the accumulation of reactive oxygen species in the cell. The reactive 
oxygen radicals are toxic and may result in a series of injuries to plant 
metabolism. It damages photosynthetic components, inactivates protein and 
enzymes, destroys cell membrane structure and permeability by causing lipid 
peroxidation (PRICE and HENDRY, 1989, 1991; WINSTON, 1990). Other authors 
suggest that many environmental stresses such as drought, salinity, low 
temperature, herbicide application and cultural management (pruning), damage 
plants directly or indirectly and suppress their vegetative growth (LARSON, 1988; 
PRICE and HENDRY, 1989; SMIRNOFF, 1995; THOMPSON et al., 1987).  
The effect on growth stimulation in C. arabica close to the intercropped herbs 
could be related to the important role of volatilization of monoterpens from herb 
oils into the environment and its effects on neighbour plants. 
The importance of aromatic plants as natural antioxidants is well established 
(DAPKEVICIOUS, 1998). As reported by ARUOMA et al. (1992) rosemary and sage 
have highly antioxidant properties due to the carnosic acid in their leaves. 
Carnosic acid is lipophilic antioxidant that scavenges singlet oxygen, hydroxyl 
radicals, and lipid peroxyl radicals, thus preventing lipid peroxidation and 
disruption on biological membranes. Antioxidant activities of polyphenols from 
sage (Salvia officinalis L.) have been reported by LU and FOO (2001). In herbs 
like rosemary, thyme, and basil similar concentrations of phenolic compounds 
were found (ZHENG and WANG, 2001) supporting the hypothesis that aromatic 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
plants are good sources of natural antioxidants. Preliminary results clearly 
indicate that antioxidant capacity of volatile essential oils and plants extracts are 
closely related to the total growth of the coffee and the vegetative stage of the 
plants.  
 
A significant difference for the number of new leaf was found in December 2005 
in Providencia farm for the treatments with basil, sage and oregano (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Increasing of leaf number in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) when intercropping aromatic 
herbs.  
 
Thus no difference were found in the other experimental unit, the average of 
new leaf appearance in coffee were better for the treatments with aromatic 
herbs intercalated in comparison with the control. A decrease in the 
development of new leaves was observed in October in both experimental units, 
it coincides with the start of fructification and constrain of nutrient availability for 
the vegetative growth. 
The relationships between vegetative and reproductive growth in coffee are 
rather complex and poorly understood. In most regions, rapid vegetative growth 
and fruit development appear to take place at different times. Nevertheless, the 
positive effect on appearance of new coffee leaves and an increase in branch 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
length when intercropped with aromatic species is of considerable relevance 
because flower buds in Arabica coffee are initiated on the same wood only once 
(RENA et al., 1994), thus the amount of growth produced in the current season 
will determine the crop yield of the following growing season. Therefore, 
additional studies have to be performed to compare the yield of coffee plants 
intercropped with aromatic species to that of control plants growing in the 
absence of aromatic plants. 
Experiment results and field observations show negative influence of caffeine 
accumulation in soil on the production yield of basil, oregano, spearmint and 
sage. Sage, oregano and basil revealed to be the less affected species in the 
three production systems evaluated and high altitude conditions.  Under plots of 
10 year of coffee establishment, basil and sage show better average of yield 
production in comparison with the other two crops, thus demonstrating that they 
can adapt well to coffee plantations by the means of a tolerance mechanism to 
the potentiality toxic effects of caffeine (Figure 3).  
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Providencia
Orquidea
Providencia
Orquidea
Providencia
Orquidea
New   Plot
Medium  Plot
Old  Plot
data in gr/m²/cut
basil
spearmint
sage
oregano
 
Figure 3. Yield production of herbs under different age coffee systems in Puebla, Mexico. 
 
 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
The negative interaction in soils with more than ten years of coffee monoculture 
has been previously reported by WEINBERG and BEALER (2001), due to 
accumulation of soluble form of caffeine in the soil. Under old coffee system the 
yield production of all species decrease and demonstrate that thus a involved 
mechanism to tolerate certain levels of caffeine, higher amounts of the alkaloid 
in the soil can be toxic, limiting the tested crops development.  A notorious 
general result for all species is that they grow better on younger fields and at 
higher altitudes. 
Data demonstrates that caffeine acts as a negative allelochemical to aromatic 
plants. Although there is a high potential of intercropping basil, sage, spearmint 
and oregano between coffees rows in order to obtain extra income for the idle 
area, evidence on this study indicates that age of the plots and accumulation of 
caffeine in the soil are limiting factors in the yield of aromatic plants.  
According to the available data, an estimation of production for the three 
different systems shows a decrease in yield with increasing age of the plot. Low 
altitude conditions are not suitable for sage, oregano, basil and mint. A possible 
ability of the aromatic plants to grow better under high altitude conditions may 
be associated with the temperature and water availability.  
For coffee production systems between 5 and 10 years of establishment, an 
extra income of 400-500 kg of basil, sage and oregano can be obtained per cut. 
Three cuts during no harvest period can be done, obtaining 1500 kg/ ha-1 as 
extra income for coffee growers in crisis. The production of spearmint is not 
significant, and cannot compete with commercial production, but competition 
with weeds and coverage in between coffee rows open an interesting 
sustainable alternative for weed management in coffee production systems.  
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Intercropping sage, spearmint, basil and oregano stimulate the plagiotropic 
growth of Coffea arabica plants most effectively in young production systems. 
Coffee growers can stabilize their income and their social condition by offering 

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
aromatic plants produced during the no-harvest period of coffee to the local 
markets and using idle space of their farms. Therefore, additional studies have 
to be performed to compare yields of aromatic species under different coffee 
production systems.  There are indications that these herbs cope with high 
caffeine levels and are even able to stimulate coffee growth. Further research of 
the biochemical nature of this interaction is promising and needed. 
On the basis that stimulatory effect of the constituents of the evaluated volatile 
essential oils acts as growth stimulants, it might be necessary to define from the 
qualitative and quantitative composition the effect of each compound. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
AUROMA, O.I., HALLIWELL, B., AESCHBACH, R. and LÖLIGER, J.; Antioxidant and 
pro-oxidant properties of active rosemary constituents: carnosol and 
carnosic acid. Xenobitica; 22:257-268, 1992. 
ANAYA, A. L., WALLER, G. R., OWOUR, P. O., FRIEDMAN, J., CHOU, C.H.; SUZUKI, 
T., ARROYO-ESTRADA, J.F. and CRUZ-ORTEGA, R.; The role of caffeine in the 
production decline due to auto toxicity in coffee and tea plantations. In 
allelopathy from molecules to ecosystems, Reigosa M. and Pedrol N. (Eds), 
pp. 71- 91. Enfield, USA: Science Publishers, Inc., 2002. 
CARDENAS, J.; Crisis cafetalera y perspectivas para los países productoras. In: 
XX Simposio Latinoamericano de Cafeticultura, San Pedro Sula, Honduras, 
28 y 29 de Mayo, CD-ROM, 2003.  
CHOU, C.H. and WALLER, G.R.; Possible allelopathic constituents of Coffea 
arabica L. J. Chem. Ecol., 6:643-659, 1980. 
CHOU C.H. and WALLER, G.R.; Isolation and indentification by mass 
spectrometry of phytotoxins in Coffee Arabica L. Bot. Bull. Acade. Sinica, 
21:25-34, 1980. 
CHOU, C. H.; The role of allelopathy in subtropical agro ecosystems of Taiwan. 
In: The science of allelopathy. Putnam, A. R. and Tang, C. S.  (Eds). NY 
John Willey and Sons, 1986.  
DAPKERVICIOUS, A., VENSKUTONIS, R., VAN BEEK, T.A. and LINSSEN, J.P.H.; 
Antioxidant activity of extracts obtained by different isolation procedures 
from some aromatic herbs grown in Lithuania. J. Sci. Food. Agric.; 77: 140-
146, 1998. 
DUKE, S.O., DAYAN, F.E., ROMAGNI, J.G. and RIMANDO, A.M.; Natural products 
as sources of herbicides: current status and future trends. Weed Research; 
Vol. 40 Issue 1, p 99, 2000.  
EINHELLIG, F. A. and LEATHER, G. R.; Potentials for exploiting allelopathy to 
enhance crop production. J. Chem. Ecol.; 14(10):1829-1842, 1988.  

Pacheco Bustos, A.; Pohlan, J.; Schulz, M. 2008. Interaction between coffee (Coffea 
arabica L.) and intercropped herbs under field conditions in the Sierra Norte of 
Puebla, Mexico. 2008. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in the tropics 
and subtropics. 109(1): 85-94, 2008. 
 
 
FRIEDMAN, J. and WALLER, G.R.; Caffeine hazards and their prevention in 
germinating seeds of coffee (Coffea arabica L.). J. Chem. Ecol.; 9:1099-
1106, 1983.  
LARSON, R.A.; The antioxidants of higher plants. Phytochemistry; 27: 969–978, 
1988. 
LU, Y. and FOO, Y.; Antioxidant activities of polyphenols from sage (Salvia 
oficinalis L). Food Chem.; 75:197-202, 2001. 
PRICE, A.H. and HENDRY G.A.F.; Stress and the role of activated oxygen 
scavengers and protective enzymes in plants subjected to drought. 
Biochemical Society Transactions; 17: 493–494, 1989. 
PRICE, A.H. and HENDRY, G.A.F.; Iron-catalysed oxygen radical formation and its 
possible contribution to drought damage in nine native grasses and three 
cereals. Plant, Cell and Environment; 14:477-484, 1991. 
POHLAN, J. (Ed.); México y la cafeticultura chiapaneca – reflexiones y 
alternativas para los cafeticultores. Aachen, Verlag Shaker, p.386, 2002.  
POHLAN, J.; Ökologischer Obstanbau – eine Alternative zum Kokaanbau im 
Departamento Cauca, Kolumbien. Journal of Agriculture in the Tropics and 
Subtropics; Volume 102, No. 2, October 2001, 169 – 183, 2001. 
PHIPPEN, W.B. and SIMON, J.E.; Anthocyanin inheritance and instability in purple 
basil (Ocimum basilicum L.). J. Hered.; 91:289–296, 2000. 
RENA, A. B., BARROS, R.S., MAESTRI, M. and SÖNDAHL, M.R.; In: Handbook of 
environmental physiology of fruit crops: subtropical and tropical crops. 
Schaffer B. and Andersen P.C. (Eds.) Boca Raton, CRC Press. 2:101-122, 
1994. 
RICE, E.L.; Allelopathy, 2nd ed. Academic, Orlando, FL. 422 pp, 1984. 
RICE E.L.; Allelopaty: An overview. In Allelocehmical, role in agriculture and 
forestry. Waller G.R. (Ed.) Washington D.C. American Chemical Society, 7-
27 (ACS Symposium series, 330), 1987. 
SMIRNOFF, N.; Antioxidant systems and plant response to the environment. In 
"Environment and Plant Metabolism: Flexibility and Acclimation" Smirnoff N. 
(Ed.), Bios Scientific, Oxford, pp. 217-243, 1995. 
THOMPSON, J.E., LEGGE, R.G. and BARBER, R.F.; The role of free radicals in 
senescence and wounding. New Phytologist; 105:317-344, 1987.  
TORRICO, J.C., POHLAN, H.A.J. and JANSSENS, M.J.J.; Alternatives for the 
transformation of drug production areas in the Chapare Region, Bolivia. 
Journal of Food, Agriculture & Environment; Vol.3 (3&4): 167 – 172, 2005. 
WALLER, G.R., FRIEDMAN, J., CHOU, C. H., SUZUKI, T. and FRIEDMAN N.; In 
proceedings of the seminar on allelochemicals and pheromones, Monograph 
5. Institute of Botany, Academia Sinica, Taipei. ROC, 239-260, 1986. 
WINSTON, G.W.; Physiochemical basis for free radical formation in cells: 
production and defences, p. 57-86. In: R.G. Alscher and J.R. Cummings 
(eds.). Stress responses in plants. Adaptation and acclimation mechanisms. 
Wiley-Liss, New York, 1990. 
WEINBERG, B. A. and BEALER, B. K.; The world of caffeine: the science and 
culture of the world's most popular drug. New York: Routledge, 2001.  
ZHENG, W. and WANG, S.Y.; Antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds in 
selected herbs. Food Chem. Toxicol.; 49: 5165-5170, 2001. 
View publication stats
