 
800.272.3900 | alz.org® 
 
© 2021 Alzheimer’s Association®. All rights reserved. This is an official publication of the Alzheimer’s Association but may be distributed freely and without 
charge by unaffiliated organizations and individuals. Such distribution does not constitute an endorsement of these parties or their activities by the 
Alzheimer’s Association. 
1 
Tau 
Tau is a protein that helps stabilize the internal skeleton of nerve cells (neurons) in 
the brain. This internal skeleton has a tube-like shape through which nutrients and 
other essential substances travel to reach different parts of the neuron. In Alzheimer’s 
disease, an abnormal form of tau builds up and causes the internal skeleton to fall 
apart. 
Tau tangles 
These abnormal forms of tau protein cling to other tau proteins inside the neuron and 
form “tau tangles.” Tau tangles and beta-amyloid plaques — large accumulations of 
microscopic brain protein fragments that slow a person’s ability to think and 
remember — are hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease.  
Tau research 
Emerging evidence suggests that Alzheimer’s-related brain changes may result from a 
complex interaction among abnormal tau and beta-amyloid proteins and several other 
factors. It appears that abnormal tau accumulates in specific brain regions involved in 
memory. As the amount of beta-amyloid in the brain increases, a tipping point is 
reached that causes abnormal tau to spread throughout the brain. 
Until a few years ago, tau and beta-amyloid levels in a person with dementia could 
only be measured after the person had died. Now, however, tau and beta-amyloid 
levels can be measured in living individuals by analyzing samples of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF), the fluid surrounding the brain, and by using positron emission 
tomography (PET) scans and special dyes to show tau tangles and beta-amyloid 
plaques in the brain. Scientists are beginning to use CSF analysis and PET scans to 
study how possible tau and beta-amyloid interactions may speed the brain changes 
that ultimately result in memory loss and other symptoms of Alzheimer’s dementia.  
Researchers at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, are using PET imaging and 
CSF testing to examine how brain health is affected by tau and beta-amyloid 
clumping. The researchers will measure protein levels in about 3,000 older 
individuals over time to determine how tau and beta-amyloid clumping — either 
alone or in combination — might influence (1) whether people in the study who have 
normal cognitive function develop mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and (2) whether 
people with MCI in the study eventually develop Alzheimer's disease. Results of the 
study could shed light on how cognitive decline occurs at the molecular level. The 
study could also provide important data for future clinical trials of therapies targeting 
tau, beta-amyloid or both. To date, the research team has found subtle but statistically 
significant differences in personality that coincide with the transition from preclinical 
Alzheimer's disease (before symptoms) to incident MCI. During that transition, 
researchers saw an increase in neuroticism and a decrease in openness, along with 
evidence of physical stress, depression, anxiety and irritability.  

 
800.272.3900 | alz.org® 
 
© 2021 Alzheimer’s Association®. All rights reserved. This is an official publication of the Alzheimer’s Association but may be distributed freely and without 
charge by unaffiliated organizations and individuals. Such distribution does not constitute an endorsement of these parties or their activities by the 
Alzheimer’s Association. 
2 
A study by scientists at University of California San Francisco Memory and Aging 
Center found that brain imaging of tau protein “tangles” reliably predicts the location 
of future brain cell death a year or more in advance. In contrast, the location of 
amyloid “plaques” did not predict how or where brain cell damage would occur. 
Some studies have found that tau can also build up inside another type of brain cell 
called astrocytes. This is called age-related tau astrogliopathy. Astrocytes are helper 
cells that serve many functions, including the maintenance of synapses, which enable 
neurons to communicate with each other. It is not yet known whether tau 
astrogliopathy impairs brain function, but researchers are studying astrogliopathy to 
find out how it might affect brain health. Other investigators are studying 
astrogliopathy early in the dementia process and in multiple ethnic groups. They hope 
to better understand the role of tau accumulation in astrocytes and whether it 
increases an individual’s risk of cognitive decline. 
Tau toxicity 
Tau accumulation has been shown to promote brain cell damage and death in 
Alzheimer’s and other dementias, including frontotemporal dementia, but the exact 
processes that lead to this toxicity are unclear. Some studies suggest stress in the 
brain cell's endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the part of the cell where proteins are 
produced, may play a role. Researchers have also discovered that disulfide bonds on 
certain amino acids act to stabilize tau and cause it to accumulate, an effect that 
worsened with increased oxidative stress (an imbalance between free radicals and 
antioxidants in the body). The identification of chemical targets triggering tau 
accumulation may lead to new treatments.  
The APOE-tau connection 
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is responsible for the creation of a type of protein 
involved in metabolizing fat in the body. Certain forms of this gene have been found 
to increase risk of developing Alzheimer’s. To gain insight into the possible 
connection between the APOE gene and tau protein in promoting nerve cell death in 
Alzheimer's, researchers are studying how the e4 form of APOE may worsen tau-
related nerve cell death. Using mice genetically engineered to carry the e2, e3 or e4 
forms of APOE, they will study which types of nerve cell death occur most frequently 
with the different forms of APOE. They will also test whether blocking certain 
biological processes prevents tau-related nerve cell death. Determining how APOE 
may be linked with tau-related nerve cell death could help scientists design targeted 
treatments to slow or prevent the damage and death of neurons in Alzheimer's 
disease. One research team found that turning off the astrocyte APOE-e4, but not 
APOE-e3, just as tau started to accumulate not only stopped subsequent brain 
shrinkage but also slowed tau accumulation.  
Drug treatments targeting tau 
Researchers are investigating ways to prevent tau protein from forming into tangles, 
which ultimately destroys the neuron. One potential therapy in clinical trials that 

 
800.272.3900 | alz.org® 
 
© 2021 Alzheimer’s Association®. All rights reserved. This is an official publication of the Alzheimer’s Association but may be distributed freely and without 
charge by unaffiliated organizations and individuals. Such distribution does not constitute an endorsement of these parties or their activities by the 
Alzheimer’s Association. 
3 
targets tau protein is AADvac1. AADvac1 is a vaccine that stimulates the body’s 
immune system to attack the abnormal form of tau protein that causes the internal 
skeleton of neurons to fall apart. If successful, it has the potential to help stop the 
progression of Alzheimer’s disease. The change in several biomarkers (measurable 
biological changes that can show if a disease is present or a person is at risk) for 
Alzheimer’s suggest AADvac1 may slow the progression of the disease. People 
receiving AADvac 1 also had positive changes in several cognitive tests. Based on 
these promising early results, the vaccine will continue to be studied in the next phase 
of clinical trials. Plans are being made for a phase 3 trial that will run for 24 to 30 
months. (Drug is still in research; not available to the public.) 
 
 
TS-0115 | Updated October 2021 
