Polyphenols: food sources and bioavailability1,2
Claudine Manach, Augustin Scalbert, Christine Morand, Christian Rémésy, and Liliana Jime´nez
ABSTRACT
Polyphenols are abundant micronutrients in our diet, and evidence
for their role in the prevention of degenerative diseases such as
cancerandcardiovasculardiseasesisemerging.Thehealtheffectsof
polyphenols depend on the amount consumed and on their bioavail-
ability. In this article, the nature and contents of the various poly-
phenols present in food sources and the influence of agricultural
practices and industrial processes are reviewed. Estimates of dietary
intakes are given for each class of polyphenols. The bioavailability
of polyphenols is also reviewed, with particular focus on intestinal
absorption and the influence of chemical structure (eg, glycosyla-
tion, esterification, and polymerization), food matrix, and excretion
back into the intestinal lumen. Information on the role of microflora
in the catabolism of polyphenols and the production of some active
metabolites is presented. Mechanisms of intestinal and hepatic con-
jugation(methylation,glucuronidation,sulfation),plasmatransport,
andeliminationinbileandurinearealsodescribed.Pharmacokinetic
data for the various polyphenols are compared. Studies on the iden-
tification of circulating metabolites, cellular uptake, intracellular
metabolismwithpossibledeconjugation,biologicalpropertiesofthe
conjugated metabolites, and specific accumulation in some target
tissues are discussed. Finally, bioavailability appears to differ
greatly between the various polyphenols, and the most abundant
polyphenols in our diet are not necessarily those that have the best
bioavailability profile. A thorough knowledge of the bioavailability
of the hundreds of dietary polyphenols will help us to identify those
that are most likely to exert protective health effects.
Am J Clin
Nutr 2004;79:727–47.
KEY WORDS
Polyphenols, flavonoids, phenolic acids, food
sources, dietary intake, intestinal absorption, metabolism, bioavail-
ability
INTRODUCTION
Over the past 10 y, researchers and food manufacturers have
become increasingly interested in polyphenols. The chief reason
for this interest is the recognition of the antioxidant properties of
polyphenols, their great abundance in our diet, and their probable
role in the prevention of various diseases associated with oxida-
tive stress, such as cancer and cardiovascular and neurodegen-
erative diseases (Scalbert A, Manach C, Morand C, Rémésy C,
Jime´nez L. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr, in press). Furthermore, poly-
phenols, which constitute the active substances found in many
medicinal plants, modulate the activity of a wide range of en-
zymes and cell receptors (1). In this way, in addition to having
antioxidant properties, polyphenols have several other specific
biological actions that are as yet poorly understood. Two aims of
research are to establish evidence for the effects of polyphenol
consumption on health and to identify which of the hundreds of
existing polyphenols are likely to provide the greatest protection
in the context of preventive nutrition. If these objectives are to be
attained, it is first essential to determine the nature and distribu-
tion of these compounds in our diet. Such knowledge will allow
evaluation of polyphenol intake and enable epidemiologic anal-
ysis that will in turn provide an understanding of the relation
between the intake of these substances and the risk of develop-
ment of several diseases. Furthermore, not all polyphenols are
absorbed with equal efficacy. They are extensively metabolized
by intestinal and hepatic enzymes and by the intestinal micro-
flora. Knowledge of the bioavailability and metabolism of the
various polyphenols is necessary to evaluate their biological
activity within target tissues. The types and distribution of poly-
phenols in foods and the bioavailability of polyphenols are the
topics of the present review.
TYPES AND DISTRIBUTION OF POLYPHENOLS IN
FOODS
Several thousand molecules having a polyphenol structure (ie,
several hydroxyl groups on aromatic rings) have been identified
in higher plants, and several hundred are found in edible plants.
These molecules are secondary metabolites of plants and are
generally involved in defense against ultraviolet radiation or
aggression by pathogens. These compounds may be classified
into different groups as a function of the number of phenol rings
that they contain and of the structural elements that bind these
rings to one another. Distinctions are thus made between the
phenolicacids,flavonoids,stilbenes,andlignans(Figure1).The
flavonoids, which share a common structure consisting of 2 ar-
omatic rings (A and B) that are bound together by 3 carbon atoms
that form an oxygenated heterocycle (ring C), may themselves be
divided into 6 subclasses as a function of the type of heterocycle
involved: flavonols, flavones, isoflavones, flavanones, antho-
cyanidins, and flavanols (catechins and proanthocyanidins)
(Figure 2). In addition to this diversity, polyphenols may be
associatedwithvariouscarbohydratesandorganicacidsandwith
one another.
1 From the Unité des Maladies Métaboliques et Micronutriments, INRA,
Saint-Genès Champanelle, France (CM, AS, CM, and CR), and Danone
Vitapole Research, Palaiseau cedex, France (LJ).
2 Address reprint requests to C Manach, Unité des Maladies Métaboliques
et Micronutriments, INRA, 63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France. E-
mail: manach@clermont.inra.fr.
Received June 3, 2003.
Accepted for publication October 17, 2003.
727
Am J Clin Nutr 2004;79:727–47. Printed in USA. © 2004 American Society for Clinical Nutrition
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

Phenolic acids
Two classes of phenolic acids can be distinguished: deriva-
tives of benzoic acid and derivatives of cinnamic acid (Figure 1).
The hydroxybenzoic acid content of edible plants is generally
very low, with the exception of certain red fruits, black radish,
and onions, which can have concentrations of several tens of
milligrams per kilogram fresh weight (2). Tea is an important
source of gallic acid: tea leaves may contain up to 4.5 g/kg fresh
wt (3). Furthermore, hydroxybenzoic acids are components of
complex structures such as hydrolyzable tannins (gallotannins in
mangoes and ellagitannins in red fruit such as strawberries, rasp-
berries, and blackberries) (4). Because these hydroxybenzoic
acids,bothfreeandesterified,arefoundinonlyafewplantseaten
by humans, they have not been extensively studied and are not
currently considered to be of great nutritional interest.
The hydroxycinnamic acids are more common than are the
hydroxybenzoic acids and consist chiefly of p-coumaric, caffeic,
ferulic, and sinapic acids. These acids are rarely found in the free
form, except in processed food that has undergone freezing,
sterilization, or fermentation. The bound forms are glycosylated
derivatives or esters of quinic acid, shikimic acid, and tartaric
acid. Caffeic and quinic acid combine to form chlorogenic acid,
which is found in many types of fruit and in high concentrations
in coffee: a single cup may contain 70–350 mg chlorogenic acid
(5). The types of fruit having the highest content (blueberries,
kiwis, plums, cherries, apples) contain 0.5–2 g hydroxycinnamic
acids/kg fresh wt (Table 1) (6).
Caffeic acid, both free and esterified, is generally the most
abundantphenolicacidandrepresentsbetween75%and100%of
the total hydroxycinnamic acid content of most fruit. Hydroxy-
cinnamic acids are found in all parts of fruit, although the highest
concentrations are seen in the outer parts of ripe fruit. Concen-
trations generally decrease during the course of ripening, but
total quantities increase as the fruit increases in size.
Ferulic acid is the most abundant phenolic acid found in cereal
grains, which constitute its main dietary source. The ferulic acid
content of wheat grain is 0.8–2 g/kg dry wt, which may rep-
resent up to 90% of total polyphenols (28, 29). Ferulic acid is
found chiefly in the outer parts of the grain. The aleurone layer
and the pericarp of wheat grain contain 98% of the total ferulic
acid. The ferulic acid content of different wheat flours is thus
directly related to levels of sieving, and bran is the main source
ofpolyphenols(30).Riceandoatflourscontainapproximatelythe
samequantityofphenolicacidsaswheatflour(63mg/kg),although
thecontentinmaizeflourisabout3timesashigh(2).Ferulicacidis
found chiefly in the trans form, which is esterified to arabinoxylans
andhemicellulosesinthealeuroneandpericarp.Only10%offerulic
acidisfoundinsolublefreeforminwheatbran(29).Severaldimers
of ferulic acid are also found in cereals and form bridge structures
between chains of hemicellulose.
FIGURE 1. Chemical structures of polyphenols.
FIGURE 2. Chemical structures of flavonoids.
728
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

TABLE 1
Polyphenols in foods
Source (serving size)
Polyphenol content
By wt or vol
By serving
mg/kg fresh wt (or mg/L)
mg/serving
Hydroxybenzoic acids (2, 6)
Blackberry (100 g)
80–270
8–27
Protocatechuic acid
Raspberry (100 g)
60–100
6–10
Gallic acid
Black currant (100 g)
40–130
4–13
p-Hydroxybenzoic acid
Strawberry (200 g)
20–90
4–18
Hydroxycinnamic acids (2, 5–7)
Blueberry (100 g)
2000–2200
200–220
Caffeic acid
Kiwi (100 g)
600–1000
60–100
Chlorogenic acid
Cherry (200 g)
180–1150
36–230
Coumaric acid
Plum (200 g)
140–1150
28–230
Ferulic acid
Aubergine (200 g)
600–660
120–132
Sinapic acid
Apple (200 g)
50–600
10–120
Pear (200 g)
15–600
3–120
Chicory (200 g)
200–500
40–100
Artichoke (100 g)
450
45
Potato (200 g)
100–190
20–38
Corn flour (75 g)
310
23
Flour: wheat, rice, oat (75 g)
70–90
5–7
Cider (200 mL)
10–500
2–100
Coffee (200 mL)
350–1750
70–350
Anthocyanins (8–10)
Aubergine (200 g)
7500
1500
Cyanidin
Blackberry (100 g)
1000–4000
100–400
Pelargonidin
Black currant (100 g)
1300–4000
130–400
Peonidin
Blueberry (100 g)
250–5000
25–500
Delphinidin
Black grape (200 g)
300–7500
60–1500
Malvidin
Cherry (200 g)
350–4500
70–900
Rhubarb (100 g)
2000
200
Strawberry (200 g)
150–750
30–150
Red wine (100 mL)
200–350
20–35
Plum (200 g)
20–250
4–50
Red cabbage (200 g)
250
50
Flavonols (11–18)
Yellow onion (100 g)
350–1200
35–120
Quercetin
Curly kale (200 g)
300–600
60–120
Kaempferol
Leek (200 g)
30–225
6–45
Myricetin
Cherry tomato (200 g)
15–200
3–40
Broccoli (200 g)
40–100
8–20
Blueberry (100 g)
30–160
3–16
Black currant (100 g)
30–70
3–7
Apricot (200 g)
25–50
5–10
Apple (200 g)
20–40
4–8
Beans, green or white (200 g)
10–50
2–10
Black grape (200 g)
15–40
3–8
Tomato (200 g)
2–15
0.4–3.0
Black tea infusion (200 mL)
30–45
6–9
Green tea infusion (200 mL)
20–35
4–7
Red wine (100 mL)
2–30
0.2–3
Flavones (11–12, 14, 18)
Parsley (5 g)
240–1850
1.2–9.2
Apigenin
Celery (200 g)
20–140
4–28
Luteolin
Capsicum pepper (100 g)
5–10
0.5–1
Flavanones (19–21)
Orange juice (200 mL)
215–685
40–140
Hesperetin
Grapefruit juice (200 mL)
100–650
20–130
Naringenin
Lemon juice (200 mL)
50–300
10–60
Eriodictyol
Isoflavones (22–25)
Soy flour (75 g)
800–1800
60–135
Daidzein
Soybeans, boiled (200 g)
200–900
40–180
Genistein
Miso (100 g)
250–900
25–90
Glycitein
Tofu (100 g)
80–700
8–70
Tempeh (100 g)
430–530
43–53
Soy milk (200 mL)
30–175
6–35
Monomeric flavanols (6, 17, 26, 27)
Chocolate (50 g)
460–610
23–30
Catechin
Beans (200 g)
350–550
70–110
Epicatechin
Apricot (200 g)
100–250
20–50
Cherry (200 g)
50–220
10–44
Grape (200 g)
30–175
6–35
Peach (200 g)
50–140
10–28
Blackberry (100 g)
130
13
Apple (200 g)
20–120
4–24
Green tea (200 mL)
100–800
20–160
Black tea (200 mL)
60–500
12–100
Red wine (100 mL)
80–300
8–30
Cider (200 mL)
40
8
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
729
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

Flavonoids
Flavonols are the most ubiquitous flavonoids in foods, and the
main representatives are quercetin and kaempferol. They are
generally present at relatively low concentrations of 15–
30 mg/kg fresh wt. The richest sources are onions (up to 1.2 g/kg
fresh wt), curly kale, leeks, broccoli, and blueberries (Table 1).
Red wine and tea also contain up to 45 mg flavonols/L. These
compounds are present in glycosylated forms. The associated
sugar moiety is very often glucose or rhamnose, but other sugars
may also be involved (eg, galactose, arabinose, xylose, glucu-
ronic acid). Fruit often contains between 5 and 10 different fla-
vonol glycosides (6). These flavonols accumulate in the outer
and aerial tissues (skin and leaves) because their biosynthesis is
stimulated by light. Marked differences in concentration exist
between pieces of fruit on the same tree and even between dif-
ferent sides of a single piece of fruit, depending on exposure to
sunlight (31). Similarly, in leafy vegetables such as lettuce and
cabbage, the glycoside concentration is 10 times as high in the
green outer leaves as in the inner light-colored leaves (14). This
phenomenon also accounts for the higher flavonol content of
cherry tomatoes than of standard tomatoes, because they have
different proportions of skin to whole fruit.
Flavones are much less common than flavonols in fruit and
vegetables. Flavones consist chiefly of glycosides of luteolin and
apigenin. The only important edible sources of flavones identi-
fied to date are parsley and celery (Table 1). Cereals such as
millet and wheat contain C-glycosides of flavones (32–34). The
skin of citrus fruit contains large quantities of polymethoxylated
flavones: tangeretin, nobiletin, and sinensetin (up to 6.5 g/L of
essential oil of mandarin) (2). These polymethoxylated flavones
are the most hydrophobic flavonoids.
In human foods, flavanones are found in tomatoes and certain
aromatic plants such as mint, but they are present in high con-
centrations only in citrus fruit. The main aglycones are naringe-
nin in grapefruit, hesperetin in oranges, and eriodictyol in lem-
ons. Flavanones are generally glycosylated by a disaccharide at
position 7: either a neohesperidose, which imparts a bitter taste
(such as to naringin in grapefruit), or a rutinose, which is flavor-
less. Orange juice contains between 200 and 600 mg hesperi-
din/L and 15–85 mg narirutin/L, and a single glass of orange
juice may contain between 40 and 140 mg flavanone glycosides
(20).Becausethesolidpartsofcitrusfruit,particularlythealbedo
(the white spongy portion) and the membranes separating the
segments, have a very high flavanone content, the whole fruit
may contain up to 5 times as much as a glass of orange juice.
Isoflavones are flavonoids with structural similarities to estro-
gens. Although they are not steroids, they have hydroxyl groups in
positions 7 and 4' in a configuration analogous to that of the hy-
droxyls in the estradiol molecule. This confers pseudohormonal
properties on them, including the ability to bind to estrogen recep-
tors, and they are consequently classified as phytoestrogens. Isofla-
vones are found almost exclusively in leguminous plants. Soya and
its processed products are the main source of isoflavones in the
humandiet.Theycontain3mainmolecules:genistein,daidzein,and
glycitein, generally in a concentration ratio of 1:1:0.2. These isofla-
vones are found in 4 forms: aglycone, 7-O-glucoside, 6-O-acetyl-
7-O-glucoside, and 6-O-malonyl-7-O-glucoside (35). The 6-O-
malonylglucoside derivatives have an unpleasant, bitter, and
astringent taste. They are sensitive to heat and are often hydrolyzed
to glycosides during the course of industrial processing, as in the
production of soya milk (36). The fermentation carried out during
themanufacturingofcertainfoods,suchasmisoandtempeh,results
in the hydrolysis of glycosides to aglycones. The aglycones are
highly resistant to heat. The isoflavone content of soya and its man-
ufactured products varies greatly as a function of geographic zone,
growingconditions,andprocessing.Soybeanscontainbetween580
and3800mgisoflavones/kgfreshwt,andsoymilkcontainsbetween
30 and 175 mg/L (25, 37).
Flavanols exist in both the monomer form (catechins) and the
polymer form (proanthocyanidins). Catechins are found in many
types of fruit (apricots, which contain 250 mg/kg fresh wt, are the
richest source; Table 1). They are also present in red wine (up to
300 mg/L), but green tea and chocolate are by far the richest
sources. An infusion of green tea contains up to 200 mg catechins
(38). Black tea contains fewer monomer flavanols, which are
oxidized during “fermentation” (heating) of tea leaves to more
complex condensed polyphenols known as theaflavins (dimers)
and thearubigins (polymers). Catechin and epicatechin are the
main flavanols in fruit, whereas gallocatechin, epigallocatechin,
and epigallocatechin gallate are found in certain seeds of legu-
minous plants, in grapes, and more importantly in tea (27, 39). In
contrast to other classes of flavonoids, flavanols are not glyco-
sylatedinfoods.Theteaepicatechinsareremarkablystablewhen
exposed to heat as long as the pH is acidic: only 15% of these
substances are degraded after 7 h in boiling water at pH 5 (40).
Proanthocyanidins, which are also known as condensed tan-
nins, are dimers, oligomers, and polymers of catechins that are
bound together by links between C4 and C8 (or C6). Their mean
degree of polymerization in foods has rarely been determined. In
cider apples, the mean degree of polymerization ranges from 4 to
11 (41). Through the formation of complexes with salivary pro-
teins, condensed tannins are responsible for the astringent char-
acter of fruit (grapes, peaches, kakis, apples, pears, berries, etc) and
beverages (wine, cider, tea, beer, etc) and for the bitterness of choc-
olate (42). This astringency changes over the course of maturation
andoftendisappearswhenthefruitreachesripeness;thischangehas
been well explained in the kaki fruit by polymerization reactions
with acetaldehyde (43). Such polymerization of tannins probably
accounts for the apparent reduction in tannin content that is com-
monly seen during the ripening of many types of fruit. It is difficult
to estimate the proanthocyanidin content of foods because proan-
thocyanidinshaveawiderangeofstructuresandmolecularweights.
The only available data concern dimers and trimers, which are as
abundant as the catechins themselves (26).
Anthocyaninsarepigmentsdissolvedinthevacuolarsapofthe
epidermal tissues of flowers and fruit, to which they impart a
pink, red, blue, or purple color (9). They exist in different chem-
ical forms, both colored and uncolored, according to pH. Al-
though they are highly unstable in the aglycone form (anthocya-
nidins), while they are in plants, they are resistant to light, pH,
and oxidation conditions that are likely to degrade them. Degra-
dation is prevented by glycosylation, generally with a glucose at
position 3, and esterification with various organic acids (citric
and malic acids) and phenolic acids. In addition, anthocyanins
are stabilized by the formation of complexes with other fla-
vonoids (copigmentation). In the human diet, anthocyanins are
found in red wine, certain varieties of cereals, and certain leafy
and root vegetables (aubergines, cabbage, beans, onions, rad-
ishes), but they are most abundant in fruit. Cyanidin is the most
common anthocyanidin in foods. Food contents are generally
proportional to color intensity and reach values up to 2–4 g/kg
730
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

fresh wt in blackcurrants or blackberries (Table 1). These values
increase as the fruit ripens. Anthocyanins are found mainly in the
skin, except for certain types of red fruit, in which they also occur
in the flesh (cherries and strawberries). Wine contains 200–
350 mg anthocyanins/L, and these anthocyanins are transformed
into various complex structures as the wine ages (10, 44).
Lignans
Lignans are formed of 2 phenylpropane units (Figure 1). The
richest dietary source is linseed, which contains secoisolaricir-
esinol (up to 3.7 g/kg dry wt) and low quantities of matairesinol.
Other cereals, grains, fruit, and certain vegetables also contain
traces of these same lignans, but concentrations in linseed are
1000 times as high as concentrations in these other food
sources (45). Lignans are metabolized to enterodiol and en-
terolactone by the intestinal microflora. The low quantities of
secoisolariciresinol and matairesinol that are ingested as part of
our normal diet do not account for the concentrations of the
metabolites enterodiol and enterolactone that are classically
measured in plasma and urine. Thus, there are undoubtedly other
lignans of plant origin that are precursors of enterodiol and en-
terolactone and that have not yet been identified (46). Thompson
et al (47) used an in vitro technique involving the fermentation of
foods by human colonic microflora to quantitatively evaluate
precursors of enterodiol and enterolactone. They confirmed that
oleaginous seeds (linseed) are the richest source and identified
algae, leguminous plants (lentils), cereals (triticale and wheat),
vegetables (garlic, asparagus, carrots), and fruit (pears, prunes)
as minor sources.
Stilbenes
Stilbenes are found in only low quantities in the human diet.
Oneofthese,resveratrol,forwhichanticarcinogeniceffectshave
been shown during screening of medicinal plants and which has
been extensively studied, is found in low quantities in wine
(0.3–7 mg aglycones/L and 15 mg glycosides/L in red wine)
(48–50). However, because resveratrol is found in such small
quantities in the diet, any protective effect of this molecule is
unlikely at normal nutritional intakes.
VARIABILITY OF POLYPHENOL CONTENT OF FOODS
Fruit and beverages such as tea and red wine constitute the
main sources of polyphenols. Certain polyphenols such as quer-
cetin are found in all plant products (fruit, vegetables, cereals,
leguminousplants,fruitjuices,tea,wine,infusions,etc),whereas
others are specific to particular foods (flavanones in citrus fruit,
isoflavones in soya, phloridzin in apples). In most cases, foods
contain complex mixtures of polyphenols, which are often
poorly characterized. Apples, for example, contain flavanol
monomers (epicatechin mainly) or oligomers (procyanidin B2
mainly), chlorogenic acid and small quantities of other hydroxy-
cinnamic acids, 2 glycosides of phloretin, several quercetin gly-
cosides, and anthocyanins such as cyanidin 3-galactoside in the
skin of certain red varieties. Apples are one of the rare types of
food for which fairly precise data on polyphenol composition are
available. Differences in polyphenol composition between vari-
eties of apples have notably been studied. The polyphenol pro-
files of all varieties of apples are practically identical, but con-
centrations may range from 0.1 to 5 g total polyphenols/kg fresh
wt and may be as high as 10 g/kg in certain varieties of cider
apples (41, 51).
For many plant products, the polyphenol composition is much
less known, knowledge is often limited to one or a few varieties,
and data sometimes do not concern the edible parts. Some foods,
particularly some exotic types of fruit and some cereals, have not
been analyzed yet. Furthermore, numerous factors other than
variety may affect the polyphenol content of plants; these factors
include ripeness at the time of harvest, environmental factors,
processing, and storage.
Environmental factors have a major effect on polyphenol con-
tent. These factors may be pedoclimatic (soil type, sun exposure,
rainfall) or agronomic (culture in greenhouses or fields, biolog-
ical culture, hydroponic culture, fruit yield per tree, etc). Expo-
sure to light has a considerable effect on most flavonoids. The
degree of ripeness considerably affects the concentrations and
proportions of the various polyphenols (6). In general, phenolic
acid concentrations decrease during ripening, whereas anthocy-
anin concentrations increase. Many polyphenols, especially phe-
nolic acids, are directly involved in the response of plants to
different types of stress: they contribute to healing by lignifica-
tion of damaged areas, they possess antimicrobial properties, and
their concentrations may increase after infection (2, 6, 52). Al-
though very few studies directly addressed this issue, the poly-
phenol content of vegetables produced by organic or sustainable
agriculture is certainly higher than that of vegetables grown
without stress, such as those grown in conventional or hydro-
ponic conditions. This was shown recently in strawberries,
blackberries, and corn (53). With the current state of knowledge,
it is extremely difficult to determine for each family of plant
products the key variables that are responsible for the variability
in the content of each polyphenol and the relative weight of those
variables. A huge amount of analysis would be required to obtain
this information. For example, determination of the p-coumaric
acid content of 500 red wines showed that genetic factors were
more important than was exposure to light or climate (54).
Storagemayalsoaffectthecontentofpolyphenolsthatareeasily
oxidized. Oxidation reactions result in the formation of more or less
polymerized substances, which lead to changes in the quality of
foods, particularly in color and organoleptic characteristics. Such
changes may be beneficial (as is the case with black tea) or harmful
(browningoffruit)toconsumeracceptability.Storageofwheatflour
results in marked loss of phenolic acids (28). After 6 mo of storage,
flours contained the same phenolic acids in qualitative terms, but
their concentrations were 70% lower. Cold storage, in contrast, did
not affect the content of polyphenols in apples (55, 56), pears (57),
or onions (58). At 25 °C, storage of apple juice for 9 mo results in
a 60% loss of quercetin and a total loss of procyanidins, despite
the fact that polyphenols are more stable in fruit juices than is vita-
min C (59, 60).
Methods of culinary preparation also have a marked effect on
the polyphenol content of foods. For example, simple peeling of
fruit and vegetables can eliminate a significant portion of poly-
phenols because these substances are often present in higher
concentrations in the outer parts than in the inner parts. Cooking
may also have a major effect. Onions and tomatoes lose between
75% and 80% of their initial quercetin content after boiling for
15 min, 65% after cooking in a microwave oven, and 30% after
frying(18).Steamcookingofvegetables,whichavoidsleaching,
is preferable. Potatoes contain up to 190 mg chlorogenic acid/kg,
mainly in the skin (61). Extensive loss occurs during cooking,
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
731
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

and no remaining phenolic acids were found in French fries or
freeze-dried mashed potatoes (54).
Industrial food processing also affects polyphenol content. As
with fruit peeling, dehulling of legume seeds and decortication
and bolting of cereals can result in a loss of some polyphenols.
Grinding of plant tissues may lead to oxidative degradation of
polyphenols as a result of cellular decompartmentation and con-
tact between cytoplasmic polyphenol oxidase and phenolic sub-
strates present in the vacuoles. Polyphenols are then transformed
into brown pigments that are polymerized to different degrees.
This unwanted process can occur, for example, during the pro-
cess of making jam or compote from fruit. Production of fruit
juice often involves clarification or stabilization steps specifi-
cally aimed at removing certain flavonoids responsible for dis-
coloration and haze formation. Manufactured fruit juices thus
have low flavonoid content. The pectinolytic enzymes used dur-
ing such processing also hydrolyze the esters of hydroxycin-
namic acid (62). Conversely, maceration operations facilitate
diffusion of polyphenols in juice, as occurs during vinification of
red wine. This maceration accounts for the fact that the polyphe-
nol content of red wines is 10 times as high as that of white wines
(63) and is also higher than that of grape juice (64).
Because of the wide range of existing polyphenols and the
considerable number of factors that can modify their concentra-
tion in foods, no reference food-composition tables (as they exist
for other micronutrients such as vitamins) have yet been drawn
up. Only partial data for certain polyphenols, such as flavonols
and flavones, catechins, and isoflavones, have been published on
the basis of direct food analysis (11, 27) or bibliographic com-
pilations (37, 65). Since March 2003, a database in which the
flavonoid contents of 225 selected foods were compiled from 97
bibliographic sources has been available on the US Department
of Agriculture website (66). A comprehensive composition table
for polyphenols is essential; it should allow daily polyphenol
consumption to be calculated from dietary questionnaires. Poly-
phenol intake could then be correlated with the incidence of
certain diseases or early markers for these diseases in epidemi-
ologic studies, which would permit investigations of the protec-
tive role of these micronutrients.
DIETARY INTAKE OF POLYPHENOLS
Only partial information is available on the quantities of poly-
phenols that are consumed daily throughout the world. These
data have been obtained through analysis of the main aglycones
(after hydrolysis of their glycosides and esters) in the foods most
widely consumed by humans.
In 1976 Kuhnau (8) calculated that dietary flavonoid intake in
theUnitedStateswas1g/dandconsistedofthefollowing:16%
flavonols, flavones, and flavanones; 17% anthocyanins; 20%
catechins; and 45% “biflavones.” Although these figures were
obtained under poorly detailed conditions, they continue to serve
as reference data. Certain studies have subsequently provided
more precise individual data concerning the intake of various
classes of polyphenols. Flavonols have been more extensively
studied. Consumption of these substances has been estimated at
20–25 mg/d in the United States, Denmark, and Holland (67–
69). In Italy, consumption ranged from 5 to 125 mg/d, and the
mean value was 35 mg/d (70). The intake of flavanones is similar
to or possibly higher than that of flavonols, with a mean con-
sumption of 28.3 mg hesperetin/d in Finland (71). Because citrus
fruit is practically the sole source of flavanones, ingestion of
these substances is probably greater in regions where these fruits
are produced, such as southern Europe. Anthocyanin consump-
tion was studied only in Finland, where high amounts of berries
are eaten, and was found to be 82 mg/d on average, although
some intakes exceeded 200 mg/d (72).
Consumption of soya in the Asian countries is 10–35 g/d,
which is equivalent to a mean intake of 25–40 mg isoflavones/d,
with a maximum intake of 100 mg/d (23, 73, 74). Americans and
Europeans, who eat little soya, consume only a few milligrams of
isoflavones per day. Nevertheless, the incorporation of growing
quantities of soya extracts into manufactured food products
could result in an increase in isoflavone intake. Women under-
going phytoestrogen replacement therapy for menopause con-
sume between 30 and 70 mg isoflavones/d in the form of soya
extract capsules (75).
In Spain the total consumption of catechins and proanthocya-
nidin dimers and trimers has been estimated at 18–31 mg/d, and
the main sources are apples, pears, grapes, and red wine (76).
Consumption of monomer flavonols in Holland is significantly
higher (50 mg/d), and the principal sources are tea, chocolate,
apples, and pears (27). Ingestion of more highly polymerized
proanthocyanidins could be as high as several hundred milli-
grams per day as previously suggested (42), but there are still no
reliable data.
Consumption of hydroxycinnamic acids may vary highly ac-
cording to coffee consumption. Some persons who drink several
cups per day may ingest as much as 500–800 mg hydroxycin-
namicacids/d,whereassubjectswhodonotdrinkcoffeeandwho
also eat small quantities of fruit and vegetables do not ingest
25 mg/d (54). A German study estimated daily consumption of
hydroxycinnamic acids and hydroxybenzoic acids at 211 and
11 mg/d, respectively. Caffeic acid intake alone was 206 mg/d,
and the principal sources were coffee (which provides 92% of
caffeic acid) and fruit and fruit juices combined (source of 59%
of p-coumaric acid) (65).
Various authors have noted a high variability in polyphenol
intake. Intake of phenolic acids ranged from 6 to 987 mg/d in
Germany (65). The mean consumption of flavonols and flavones
in the Dutch population was 23 mg/d; values at the 10th and 90th
percentiles were 4 and 46 mg/d, respectively; and some subjects
consumed up to 100 mg/d (69). The main reason for these vari-
ations is individual food preferences. When polyphenol content
isexpressedastheamountprovidedbyafoodserving,asinTable
1, the consumption of one particular food, such as berries for
anthocyanins or coffee for hydroxycinnamic acids, clearly ap-
pears to be capable of markedly changing the total polyphenol
intake. If mean values are required, the addition of the intakes of
flavonols, flavanones, flavanols (monomers, dimers, and tri-
mers), and isoflavones gives a total daily consumption of 100–
150 mg in Western populations, to which must be added the
considerably variable intake of hydroxycinnamic acids, antho-
cyanins, and proanthocyanidins. Finally, the total polyphenol
intake probably commonly reaches 1 g/d in people who eat sev-
eral servings of fruit and vegetables per day. Note that it is really
difficult to follow a diet totally free of polyphenols. Because
polyphenol intake is difficult to evaluate by using dietary ques-
tionnaires, biomarkers for polyphenol exposure would be very
useful. A few studies have tried to correlate flavonol, flavanone,
and isoflavone intakes with plasma concentrations or urinary
excretion of metabolites (77–82), but we are not yet able to
732
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

propose a reliable measurement in urine or plasma samples that
could reflect the long-term intake of the various polyphenols.
BIOAVAILABILITY OF POLYPHENOLS
It is important to realize that the polyphenols that are the most
common in the human diet are not necessarily the most active
within the body, either because they have a lower intrinsic ac-
tivity or because they are poorly absorbed from the intestine,
highly metabolized, or rapidly eliminated. In addition, the me-
tabolites that are found in blood and target organs and that result
from digestive or hepatic activity may differ from the native
substances in terms of biological activity. Extensive knowledge
of the bioavailability of polyphenols is thus essential if their
health effects are to be understood.
Metabolism of polyphenols occurs via a common pathway
(83). The aglycones can be absorbed from the small intestine.
However, most polyphenols are present in food in the form of
esters, glycosides, or polymers that cannot be absorbed in their
native form. These substances must be hydrolyzed by intestinal
enzymes or by the colonic microflora before they can be ab-
sorbed. When the flora is involved, the efficiency of absorption
is often reduced because the flora also degrades the aglycones
that it releases and produces various simple aromatic acids in the
process. During the course of absorption, polyphenols are con-
jugated in the small intestine and later in the liver. This process
mainly includes methylation, sulfation, and glucuronidation.
This is a metabolic detoxication process common to many xe-
nobiotics that restricts their potential toxic effects and facilitates
their biliary and urinary elimination by increasing their hydro-
philicity. The conjugation mechanisms are highly efficient, and
aglycones are generally either absent in blood or present in low
concentrations after consumption of nutritional doses. Circulat-
ing polyphenols are conjugated derivatives that are extensively
bound to albumin. Polyphenols are able to penetrate tissues,
particularly those in which they are metabolized, but their ability
to accumulate within specific target tissues needs to be further
investigated. Polyphenols and their derivatives are eliminated
chiefly in urine and bile. Polyphenols are secreted via the biliary
route into the duodenum, where they are subjected to the action
of bacterial enzymes, especially -glucuronidase, in the distal
segments of the intestine, after which they may be reabsorbed.
This enterohepatic recycling may lead to a longer presence of
polyphenols within the body.
Intestinal absorption and metabolism
Much about the intestinal mechanisms of the gastrointestinal
absorption of polyphenols remains unknown. Most polyphenols
are probably too hydrophilic to penetrate the gut wall by passive
diffusion, but the membrane carriers that could be involved in
polyphenol absorption have not been identified. To date, the
unique active transport mechanism that has been described is a
Na-dependent saturable transport mechanism involved in cin-
namic and ferulic acid absorption in the rat jejunum (84).
In foods, all flavonoids except flavanols are found in glyco-
sylated forms, and glycosylation influences absorption. The fate
of glycosides in the stomach is not clear. Experiments using
surgically treated rats in which absorption was restricted to the
stomachshowedthatabsorptionatthegastriclevelispossiblefor
some flavonoids, such as quercetin and daidzein, but not for their
glycosides (85, 86). Most of the glycosides probably resist acid
hydrolysis in the stomach and thus arrive intact in the duodenum
(87). Only aglycones and some glucosides can be absorbed in the
small intestine, whereas polyphenols linked to a rhamnose moi-
ety must reach the colon and be hydrolyzed by rhamnosidases of
the microflora before absorption (88, 89). The same probably
applies to polyphenols linked to arabinose or xylose, although
this question has not been specifically studied. Because absorp-
tion occurs less readily in the colon than in the small intestine
because of a smaller exchange area and a lower density of trans-
port systems, as a general rule, glycosides with rhamnose are
absorbed less rapidly and less efficiently than are aglycones and
glucosides. This has been clearly shown in humans for quercetin
glycosides: maximum absorption occurs 0.5–0.7 h after inges-
tion of quercetin 4'-glucoside and 6–9 h after ingestion of the
same quantity of rutin (quercetin-3-rutinoside). The bioavail-
ability of rutin is only 15–20% of that of quercetin 4'-glucoside
(90, 91). Similarly, absorption of quercetin is more rapid and
efficient after ingestion of onions, which are rich in glucosides,
than after ingestion of apples containing both glucosides and
variousotherglycosides(92).Inthecaseofquercetinglucosides,
absorption occurs in the small intestine, and the efficiency of
absorption is higher than that for the aglycone itself (93, 94). The
underlying mechanism by which glucosylation facilitates quer-
cetin absorption has been partly elucidated. Hollman et al sug-
gested that glucosides could be transported into enterocytes by
the sodium-dependent glucose transporter SGLT1 (93). They
could then be hydrolyzed inside the cells by a cytosolic
-glucosidase (95). Another pathway involves the lactase phlo-
ridzinehydrolase,aglucosidaseofthebrushbordermembraneof
the small intestine that catalyzes extracellular hydrolysis of some
glucosides, which is followed by diffusion of the aglycone across
the brush border (96). Both enzymes are probably involved, but
their relative contribution for the various glucosides remains to
be clarified. Quercetin 3-glucoside, which is not a substrate for
cytosolic-glucosidase,iscertainlyabsorbedafterhydrolysisby
lactase phloridzine hydrolase, at least in rats, whereas hydrolysis
of quercetin 4'-glucoside seems to involve both pathways (97,
98). In humans, whatever the mechanism of deglucosylation, the
kinetics of plasma concentrations are similar after ingestion of
quercetin 3-glucoside or quercetin 4'-glucoside (99). Isoflavone
glycosides present in soya products can also be deglycosylated
by -glucosidases from the human small intestine (95, 96). How-
ever, the effect of glucosylation on absorption is less clear for
isoflavones than for quercetin. Aglycones present in fermented
soya products were shown to be better absorbed than were the
glucosides ingested from soybeans (100). However, a dose or
matrix effect may explain the difference in absorption observed
in this first study. Setchell et al (101) showed that when pure
daidzein, genistein, or their corresponding 7-glucosides were
administered orally to healthy volunteers, a tendency toward
greater bioavailability was observed with the glucosides, as mea-
sured from the area under the curve of the plasma concentrations:
2.94, 4.54, 4.52, and 4.95 g · h/mL for daidzein, genistein,
daidzin, and genistin, respectively. However, in another human
study, peak plasma concentrations were markedly higher after
aglycone ingestion than after glucoside ingestion, and this effect
was observed with low or high single doses and after long-term
intakes (102). In addition, hydrolysis of isoflavone glycosides
into aglycones in a soy drink did not change the bioavailability of
the isoflavones in humans (103). No data are available for other
polyphenols in humans, but note that in rats, no enhancement of
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
733
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

absorption was observed with glucosylation of naringenin and
phlorizin (104, 105). Furthermore, diglucosylation of the lignan
secoisolariciresinol decreases its absorption (106).
Glycosylation does not influence the nature of the circulating
metabolites. Intact glycosides of quercetin, daidzein, and
genistein were not recovered in plasma or urine after ingestion as
pure compounds or from complex food (107–110). For fla-
vanones, only trace amounts of glycosides have been detected in
humanurine,correspondingto0.02%oftheadministereddoseof
naringin (111). But a very high dose (500 mg) of the pure com-
pound was administered in this study, and some metabolic pro-
cesses may have been saturated by this nonnutritional intake.
Anthocyanins constitute an exception, because intact glycosides
are the major circulating forms. The explanation for this may lie
in the instability of these molecules in the aglycone form or in a
specific mechanism of absorption or metabolism for anthocya-
nins. Passamonti et al (112) have proposed that glycosides of
anthocyanins may be transported by bilitranslocase at the gastric
level, bacause they have been shown to be good ligands for this
carrier. They could also be directly converted into glucuronides
by a UDP glucose dehydrogenase as suggested by Wu et al (113).
Proanthocyanidins differ from most other plant polyphenols
because of their polymeric nature and high molecular weight.
This particular feature should limit their absorption through the
gut barrier, and oligomers larger than trimers are unlikely to be
absorbed in the small intestine in their native forms. In vitro
experiments using single layers of Caco-2 cells as a model of
absorption in the small intestine showed that only the dimers and
trimers of flavanols are able to cross the intestinal epithelium
(114). Procyanidin B2 is very poorly absorbed in rats, whereas
procyanidin B3 is not absorbed (115, 116). The possibility that
procyanidin oligomers are hydrolyzed to mixtures of flavanol
monomers and dimers in acidic conditions was suggested by
Spencer et al from in vitro experiments (117). However, purified
procyanidin dimer B3, as well as grapeseed proanthocyanidins
having a higher degree of polymerization, are not degraded to
more readily absorbable monomers in rats (116). The stability of
proanthocyanidins was investigated in humans by regular anal-
ysis of gastric juice sampled with a gastric probe after ingestion
of a proanthocyanidin-rich cocoa beverage (118). This study
confirmed that proanthocyanidins are not degraded in the acidic
conditions of the stomach in vivo. A minor absorption of some
procyanidin dimers seems possible in humans. The procyanidin
dimer B2 was detected in the plasma of volunteers after ingestion
of a cocoa beverage; however, the maximal plasma concentra-
tionthatwasreached2hafteringestionwasmuchlowerthanthat
reached after a roughly equivalent intake of epicatechin (0.04
compared with 6.0 mol/L) (119). Proanthocyanidins, which are
among the most abundant dietary polyphenols, are very poorly
absorbed and may exert only local activity in the gastrointestinal
tract or activity mediated by phenolic acids produced through
microbial degradation. Their local action may nevertheless be
important because the intestine is particularly exposed to oxidiz-
ing agents and may be affected by inflammation and numerous
diseases such as cancer (120). Polyphenol concentrations in the
colon can reach several hundred micromoles per liter (83), and
together with a few carotenoids, polyphenols constitute the only
dietary antioxidants present in the colon, because vitamins C and
E are absorbed in the upper segments of the intestine.
Despitethescarcityofstudiesperformedonthebioavailability
of hydroxycinnamic acids, when ingested in the free form, these
compounds are rapidly absorbed from the small intestine and are
conjugated and, in particular, glucuronidated in the same way
that flavonoids are (54, 121). However these compounds are
naturally esterified in plant products, and this impairs their ab-
sorption. Human tissues (intestinal mucosa, liver) and biological
fluids (plasma, gastric juice, duodenal fluid) do not possess es-
terasescapableofhydrolyzingchlorogenicacidtoreleasecaffeic
acid (122–124). This has also been observed in rats (125, 126).
Onlythecolonicmicroflorawouldbecapableofcarryingoutthis
hydrolysis, and some of the bacterial strains involved have been
identified (127). Consequently, as observed for flavonoid gly-
cosides that must be hydrolyzed by the microflora, the efficiency
of absorption of phenolic acids is markedly reduced when they
are present in the esterified form rather than in the free form (123,
125, 128). In patients who have undergone colonic ablation,
caffeicacidwasmuchbetterabsorbedthanwaschlorogenicacid:
11% and 0.3% of the ingested doses were excreted in urine,
respectively (123). Similarly, when chlorogenic acid was given
by gavage to rats, no intact compound was detected in plasma in
the following 6 h, and the maximum concentrations of metabo-
lites obtained after administration of caffeic acid in the same
conditions were 100-fold those of the metabolites (various glu-
curonidated or sulfated derivatives of caffeic and ferulic acids)
obtained after chlorogenic acid administration (125). Surpris-
ingly, the plasma concentrations were maximal only 30 min after
gavage, which may seem inconsistent with hydrolysis of chlo-
rogenic acid in the cecum. The same observation was made in a
human study. When volunteers ingested coffee containing high
amounts of esterified phenolic acids but no free caffeic acid, the
peak plasma concentration of caffeic acid was observed only 1 h
after ingestion of the coffee (129). In this study, the alkaline
hydrolysis of coffee showed that chlorogenic acid represented
only 30% of the bound caffeic acid. Thus, a possible explanation
is that other forms of caffeic acid present in coffee may have been
hydrolyzed in the upper part of the gut. Furthermore, the modes
of administration used in both studies, ie, direct stomach intuba-
tion in the rat study and ingestion of coffee alone by fasted
volunteers in the second study, might allow a rapid transit to the
colon and explain the rapid kinetics of appearance of plasma
metabolites. However, these 2 studies raise doubt about the total
inability of the tissues to hydrolyze esterified phenolic acids.
In addition to being esterified to simple acids, hydroxycin-
namic acids may be bound to polysaccharides in plant cell walls;
the main example of this is esterification of ferulic acid to arabi-
noxylans in the outer husks of cereals. Although free ferulic acid
is reported to be rapidly and efficiently absorbed (up to 25%)
from tomatoes in humans (130), its absorption after ingestion of
cereals is expected to be much lower because of this esterifica-
tion. Ferulic acid metabolites recovered in the urine of rats rep-
resent only 3% of the ingested dose when ferulic acid is provided
as wheat bran, whereas the metabolites represent 50% of the dose
when ferulic acid is provided as a pure compound (131). Another
study showed that feruloyl esterases are present throughout the
entire gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the intestinal mucosa,
and that some of the ester bonds between ferulic acid and poly-
saccharides in cell walls may thus be hydrolyzed in the small
intestine (126). However, the role of feruloyl esterases seems to
be very limited, and absorption occurs mainly in the colon after
hydrolysisbyenzymesofbacterialorigin.Xylanasesdegradethe
734
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

parietal polymers to small, soluble feruloyl oligosaccharides,
and then esterases release free ferulic acid. Note that diferulic
acids from cereal brans have been shown to be absorbed in rats
(132).
The effects of the food matrix on the bioavailability of poly-
phenols have not been examined in much detail. Direct interac-
tions between polyphenols and some components of food, such
as binding to proteins and polysaccharides, can occur, and these
interactions may affect absorption. Furthermore, more indirect
effects of the diet on various parameters of gut physiology (pH,
intestinal fermentations, biliary excretion, transit time, etc) may
have consequences on the absorption of polyphenols. Enzymes
and carriers involved in polyphenol absorption and metabolism
may also be induced or inhibited by the presence of some mi-
cronutrients or xenobiotics. Interactions with milk proteins were
consideredfirstbecauseSerafinietal(133)reportedthataddition
ofmilktoblackteaabolishedtheincreaseinantioxidantpotential
that was observed when tea was consumed without milk. How-
ever, subsequent studies showed that addition of milk to black or
green tea had no effect on the bioavailability of catechins, quer-
cetin, or kaempferol in humans (134, 135). Some investigators
have speculated that the presence of alcohol in red wine could
improve the intestinal absorption of polyphenols by increasing
their solubility. Ethanol was shown to enhance the absorption of
quercetin in rats, but only when present at a concentration too
high to be attained in the diet (30%, by vol) (136). In humans,
plasma concentrations of catechin metabolites were similar after
consumption of red wine or dealcoholized red wine (137). Yet,
20% more catechin metabolites were excreted in urine after red
wine intake than after dealcoholized red wine intake, which in-
dicates a possible role of ethanol in enhancing the rate of poly-
phenol elimination, perhaps by a diuretic effect (138). On the
other hand, tartaric acid, which is a major organic acid in wine,
was shown to enhance the absorption of catechin in rats (139).
Existing data do not suggest a marked effect of the various diet
components on polyphenol bioavailability. The absorption of
quercetin, catechin, and resveratrol in humans was recently
shown to be broadly equivalent when these polyphenols were
administered in 3 different matrices: white wine, grape juice, and
vegetable juice (140). According to Hendrich (141), neither the
background diet or type of soy food nor the presence of 40 g
wheat fiber significantly alters the apparent absorption of isofla-
vones. However, more studies are needed, especially on dietary
fiber. Dietary fiber is generally associated with polyphenols in
plant foods and stimulates intestinal fermentation, which could
influence the production of particular microbial metabolites. Ad-
ministration of polyphenols without a food matrix could mark-
edly affect their bioavailability. With regard to flavonols, much
higherplasmaconcentrationswereachievedwhenquercetinglu-
cosides were administered to fasted volunteers in the form of a
water-alcoholsolution(upto5mol/L)(99)thanwhenanequiv-
alent quantity was ingested with foods such as onions, apples, or
a complex meal (0.3–0.75 nmol/L) (92, 107). This suggests that
the consumption of any food may limit polyphenol absorption
and that high plasma concentrations would be obtained only if
supplements were taken separately from meals.
The role of the colonic microflora
Polyphenols that are not absorbed in the small intestine reach
the colon. The microflora hydrolyzes glycosides into aglycones
and extensively metabolizes the aglycones into various aromatic
acids (8, 142). Aglycones are split by the opening of the hetero-
cycle at different points depending on their chemical structure:
flavonols mainly produce hydroxyphenylacetic acids, flavones
and flavanones mainly produce hydroxyphenylpropionic acids,
and flavanols mainly produce phenylvalerolactones and hy-
droxyphenylpropionic acids. These acids are further metabo-
lized to derivatives of benzoic acid. The microbial metabolites
are absorbed and conjugated with glycine, glucuronic acid, or
sulfate. The cleavage and metabolic pathways are well estab-
lished in animals, and the influence of chemical structure on
degradation is known. For example, the absence of a free hy-
droxylinposition5,7,or4'protectsthecompoundfromcleavage
(143). However, data are still limited in humans, so it is possible
that new microbial metabolites will be identified. Interindividual
variations and the influence of the microflora composition and of
the usual diet on microbial metabolite production have to be
evaluated.Recentstudieshaveshownthatplasmaconcentrations
and urinary excretion of microbial metabolites in humans can be
higher than those of tissular metabolites, especially for polyphe-
nols such as wine polyphenols that are not easily absorbed (128,
144, 145). Thus, the identification and quantification of micro-
bial metabolites constitute an important field of research. Some
microbial metabolites may have a physiologic effect; for exam-
ple, hydroxyphenylacetic acids have been suggested to inhibit
platelet aggregation (146). Besides, among the wide array of
aromatic acids with low molecular weight, some may be used as
biomarkers for polyphenol intake. An association between poly-
phenol intake and the amount of excreted hippuric acid was
found after consumption of black tea or a crude extract from
Equisenum arvense (147, 148). However, hippuric acid is not a
degradation product of catechin and can be derived from sources
other than polyphenols, such as quinic acid and the aromatic
amino acids; thus, it is not a suitable biomarker of polyphenol
intake (144). 3-Hydroxyhippuric acid may be a more valid
biomarker (124).
Specific active metabolites are produced by the colonic mi-
croflora. This is the case with lignans from linseed, which are
metabolized to enterolactone and enterodiol, which have agonis-
tic or antagonistic effects on estrogens (149, 150). Similarly,
equol produced from soya daidzein appears to have phytoestro-
genic properties equivalent to or even greater than those of the
original isoflavone (151, 152). There is a great interindividual
variability in the capacity to produce equol. Only 30-40% of the
occidental people excrete significant quantities of equol after
consumption of isoflavones, and these persons are called “equol
producers” (152, 153). The corresponding percentage among
Asian populations is unknown, but a recent study suggested that
the percentage in Japanese men could be as high as 60% (154).
The ability or inability of persons to produce equol seems to
remain the same for at least several years (152, 155). The com-
position of the intestinal flora plays a major role. Inoculation of
germ-free rats with human flora from equol producers confers on
these rats the capacity to produce this metabolite, whereas col-
onization with flora from non–equol producers leaves the rats
incapable of producing equol (156). Equol is not recovered in
plasma from infants who are fed soy-based formulas, which
suggests that the bacteria responsible for its production are not
developed in the first months of life (157). Three strains of
bacteria are reportedly able to convert pure daidzein to equol in
vitro: Streptococcus intermedius ssp., Ruminococcus productus
spp., and Bacteroides ovatus spp. (158). The possibility of con-
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
735
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

verting nonproducers to producers by food must be investigated.
Equolproducerstendtoconsumelessfatandmorecarbohydrates
as percentages of energy than do non–equol producers (159,
160). Consumption of dietary fiber has been suspected to affect
equol production by favoring the growth of certain bacterial
species. However, supplementation with 16 g wheat bran/d did
not increase equol production in young women (159). In mice,
equol production increased with the addition of fructooligosac-
charides in the diet (161). But this result needs to be confirmed in
humans because of obvious interspecies differences, which are
shown by the fact that rats are constitutive equol producers. The
effect of adaptation of the intestinal flora to the consumption of
isoflavones is not clear. Lu et al (162) observed an increase in
equol production after 1 mo of isoflavone consumption. Some
non-equol-producing women even acquired the ability to pro-
duce equol after consuming soymilk for 2 wk (153). But Lampe
et al (163) did not observe any effect on equol production of a
1-mo adaptation in comparison with a 4-d supplementation. A
more comprehensive knowledge of the factors that may influ-
ence equol production is all the more essential because Setchell
et al (152) convincingly proposed that equol producers might
gain more benefits from soya consumption than would nonpro-
ducers.
Conjugation and nature of metabolites
Once absorbed, polyphenols are subjected to 3 main types of
conjugation:
methylation,
sulfation,
and
glucuronidation.
Catechol-O-methyl transferase catalyzes the transfer of a methyl
group from S-adenosyl-L-methionine to polyphenols having an
o-diphenolic(catechol)moiety.Suchareactioniswellknownfor
quercetin, catechin, caffeic acid, and luteolin, and Wu et al (113)
recently showed for the first time the methylation of cyanidin to
peonidin in humans. The methylation generally occurs predom-
inantly in the 3' position of the polyphenol, but a minor propor-
tion of 4'-O-methylated product is also formed. Note that a sub-
stantial amount of 4'-methylepigallocatechin was detected in
human plasma after ingestion of tea (164, 165). Catechol-O-
methyl transferase is present in a wide range of tissues. Its ac-
tivity is highest in the liver and the kidneys (166, 167) although
significant methylation was reported for catechin in the small
intestine of rats (168). Sulfotransferases catalyze the transfer of
a sulfate moiety from 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate to
a hydroxyl group on various substrates (steroids, bile acids, poly-
phenols, etc). Neither the isoforms that are specifically involved
in the conjugation of polyphenols nor the positions of sulfation
for the various polyphenols have yet been clearly identified, but
sulfation clearly occurs mainly in the liver (166, 169). UDP-
glucuronosyltransferases are membrane-bound enzymes that are
located in the endoplasmic reticulum in many tissues and that
catalyze the transfer of a glucuronic acid from UDP-glucuronic
acid to steroids, bile acids, polyphenols, and thousands of dietary
constituents and xenobiotics. The presence of glucuronidated
metabolites in the mesenteric or portal blood after perfusion of
polyphenols in the small intestine of rats shows that glucuronida-
tion of polyphenols first occurs in the enterocytes before further
conjugation in the liver (170–172). This is probably the case in
humans as well, because in humans the in vitro glucuronidation
of quercetin and luteolin by microsomes from the intestine is
markedly higher than that by microsomes from the liver (173).
About 15 isoforms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases have been
identified in humans, and these isoforms have broad and over-
lapping substrate specificities and different tissue distribution
(174). The subfamily of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases called
UGT1A that is localized in the intestine probably plays a major
role in the first-pass metabolism of polyphenols. These isoen-
zymes have a wide polymorphic expression pattern that could
result in a high interindividual variability in polyphenol glucu-
ronidation. The active isoenzymes of the 1A class seem to differ
according to the polyphenol considered (173, 175). In vitro glu-
curonidation of quercetin, luteolin, or isorhamnetin by rat or
human microsomes in the intestine and the liver showed that,
even if the nature of the glucuronides formed is constant, the
proportionofthevariousmetabolitesvarieswidelydependingon
the species and organ (173, 176, 177). The highest rate of con-
jugation is observed at the 7-position, and the 5-position does not
appear to be a site for glucuronidation. For most flavonoids, a
significant proportion of the glucuronides that are formed in the
intestinal mucosa are secreted back to the gut lumen, which
reduces net absorption (178, 179). The transporter multiresistant
protein 2 (MRP2) or the P-glycoprotein may be involved in this
efflux (180, 181). The proportion of glucuronides that are se-
creted toward the mucosal side depends markedly on the struc-
ture of the polyphenol (0–52% of the initial dose) (182). Intes-
tinal excretion of glucuronides does not occur with catechin and
ferulic acid, which indicates that this is not a mechanism of
elimination for all polyphenols (131, 168, 182).
The metabolic fate in the liver of the conjugates that are pro-
duced in the intestine is not yet clear. After penetration into
HepG2 cells, quercetin 7-glucuronide and quercetin 3-O-
glucuronide undergo 2 types of metabolism: methylation of the
catechol and deglucuronidation followed by 3'-sulfation (183).
However, in the same conditions, quercetin 4'-glucuronide is not
metabolized. This could result from a lower rate of penetration
into the cells or a lower affinity of the metabolizing enzymes for
this substrate. A complex set of conjugating enzymes and carrier
systems is probably involved in the regulation of uptake and the
production and release of the various polyphenol metabolites by
the hepatocytes, as shown for other conjugates (184, 185). The
activity of these enzymes and carrier systems may depend on the
nature of the polyphenol and may be influenced by genetic poly-
morphisms that lead to important interindividual differences in
the capacity to metabolize polyphenols.
The relative importance of the 3 types of conjugation (meth-
ylation, sulfation, and glucuronidation) appears to vary accord-
ing to the nature of the substrate and the dose ingested. Sulfation
is generally a higher-affinity, lower-capacity pathway than is
glucuronidation, so that when the ingested dose increases, a shift
from sulfation toward glucuronidation occurs (186). The balance
between sulfation and glucuronidation of polyphenols also
seems to be affected by species, sex, and food deprivation (187).
Moreover, inhibition of methylation by a specific inhibitor shifts
metabolism of quercetin glucuronides toward sulfation in
HepG2 cells (183). Regardless of the respective contributions of
methylation, sulfation, and glucuronidation, in general, the ca-
pacityforconjugationishigh.Theconcentrationoffreeaglycone
isusuallyverylowinplasmaaftertheintakeofanutritionaldose,
except for tea catechins (up to 77% for epigallocatechin gallate)
(164). Saturation of the conjugation processes has been observed
in rats administered high doses and rats given an acute supply of
polyphenols by gavage (166, 170). Competitive inhibition of
conjugation could also occur in the presence of various polyphe-
nolsandxenobioticsintheintestine,butithasneverbeenstudied.
736
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

In these conditions, significant amounts of free aglycones could
circulateinblood,probablywithbiologicaleffectsdifferentfrom
those of conjugated metabolites.
Identification of circulating metabolites has been undertaken
for only a few polyphenols. This identification must include not
only the nature and number of the conjugating groups but also the
positions of these groups on the polyphenol structure because
these positions can affect the biological properties of the
conjugates (176). After consumption of onions containing
glucosides of quercetin, the major circulating compounds in
human plasma were identified as quercetin 3-O-glucuronide,
3'-O-methylquercetin 3-O-glucuronide, and quercetin 3'-O-
sulfate (188). However, analysis by liquid chromatography–
tandem mass spectrometry of human plasma samples obtained
in very similar conditions did not confirm the presence of
sulfated quercetin (109). For other polyphenols, only scarce
data on the proportions of the various types of conjugates and
the percentages of free forms in plasma are available (101,
164, 175, 189–192). The main circulating compounds are
generally glucuronides.
Plasma transport and partitioning into lipid structures
Polyphenol metabolites are not free in the blood. In vitro
incubation of quercetin in normal human plasma showed that
quercetin is extensively bound to plasma proteins (99% for con-
centrations up to 15 mol/L), whereas binding to VLDL is not
significant (0.5%) (193). Metabolites of quercetin are also
extensively bound to plasma proteins in the plasma of rats fed a
quercetin-enriched diet (88). Albumin is the primary protein
responsible for the binding. The affinity of polyphenols for al-
bumin varies according to their chemical structure. Kaempferol
andisorhamnetin,whichdifferfromquercetininthenatureofthe
B-ring substitution, have an affinity for human serum albumin
that is similar to that of quercetin (194). In contrast, substitution
of 3-OH markedly weakens binding to albumin, as shown for
rutin and isoquercitrin, the 3-O-glycosides of quercetin (195).
The effect of sulfation and glucuronidation is unknown, but it
probably depends highly on the position of substitution. Hy-
droxycinnamicacids,especiallyferulicandcoumaricacids,have
a low affinity for bovine serum albumin but may have a different
affinity for albumin of human origin (196). No data are available
for the other polyphenols. It must be kept in mind that although
the intrinsic affinity of circulating polyphenol conjugates for
albumin may be much weaker than that of quercetin itself, the
physiologic concentration of serum albumin (0.6 mmol/L) is
probably large enough to allow their extensive binding. The
degree of binding to albumin may have consequences for the rate
of clearance of metabolites and for their delivery to cells and
tissues. The conventional view is that cellular uptake is propor-
tional to the unbound concentration of metabolites. Yet, varia-
tions in local pH at specific sites may induce conformational
changes in albumin, which lead to dissociation of the ligand-
albumin complex. Conformational changes in albumin have
been shown to be induced by nonspecific interactions with var-
iousmembranes(197).Whethersuchchangescouldfacilitatethe
cellular uptake of ligands such as polyphenol metabolites is un-
clear. However, incubations of quercetin in human whole blood
or in suspensions of erythrocytes in the absence of plasma pro-
teins suggests that binding to albumin could considerably de-
crease the association of quercetin with these cells (193). The
effect of albumin binding on the biological activity of polyphe-
nols is unclear. Does the bound ligand have some biological
activity, or does the polyphenol have to be in the free form to be
active? Dangles et al (195) showed that the catechol moiety of
albumin-bound quercetin remains accessible to oxidizing agents
such as periodate. If this key structural element of quercetin is
also accessible to free radicals, this suggests that quercetin could
exert its antioxidant activity even when it is bound to albumin.
However, the biological properties of polyphenols are certainly
not limited only to their antioxidant capacity; thus, binding to
albumin may have a considerable effect.
The partitioning of polyphenols and their metabolites between
aqueous and lipid phases is largely in favor of the aqueous phase
because of their hydrophilicity and binding to albumin. How-
ever, in some lipophilic membrane models, some polyphenols
penetrate the membrane to various extents (198–202). Quercetin
showed the deepest interaction, probably because of its ability to
assume a planar conformation (203). At physiologic pH, most
polyphenols interact with the polar head groups of phospholipids
at the membrane surface via the formation of hydrogen bonds
thatinvolvethehydroxylgroupsofthepolyphenols(204).Ahigh
number of hydroxyl groups on the polyphenol structure and an
increase in pH that leads to deprotonation of the hydroxyl groups
would thus enhance interactions between the polyphenols and
the membrane surface. This adsorption of polyphenols probably
limits the access of aqueous oxidants to the membrane surface
and their initial attack on that surface.
LDL is made up of lipophilic structures that, once oxidized,
participate in the etiology of atherosclerosis. Many studies have
shown that various polyphenols have the ability to protect LDL
from oxidation. However, a very small proportion of plasma
polyphenols are in fact associated with the LDL fraction after
consumption of nutritional doses of these compounds (205, 206).
They are associated with lipoproteins only by ionic interactions
with charged residues on the surface of the particules. The low
integration of polyphenols into LDL has been confirmed by in
vitro incubation experiments (207, 208). Protection probably
occurs at the interface between lipophilic and hydrophilic
phases. However, a recent study in which [3H]genistein was
incubated in human plasma showed that genistein and its li-
pophilic derivatives were incorporated into HDL and, to a lesser
extent, into LDL (209). These lipophilic derivatives could result
from enzymatic esterification with fatty acids in plasma, as re-
ported for estrogens, but further characterization of these deriv-
atives is needed.
Plasma concentrations
Plasma concentrations reached after polyphenol consumption
vary highly according to the nature of the polyphenol and the
food source. They are on the order of 0.3–0.75 mol/L after
consumptionof80–100mgquercetinequivalentadministeredin
theformofapples,onions,ormealsrichinplantproducts(90,92,
107).Wheningestedintheformofgreentea(0.1–0.7mol/Lfor
an intake of 90–150 mg), cocoa (0.25–0.7 mol/L for an intake
of 70–165 mg) (210–213), or red wine (0.09 mol/L for an
intake of 35 mg) (137), catechin and epicatechin are as effec-
tively absorbed as is quercetin. The maximum concentrations of
hesperetin metabolites determined in plasma 5–7 h after con-
sumption of orange juice were 1.3–2.2 mol/L for an intake of
130–220 mg (189, 214). Naringenin in grapefruit juice appears
to be absorbed even better: a peak plasma concentration of
6 mol/L is obtained after ingestion of 200 mg. In contrast,
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
737
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

plasma concentrations of anthocyanins are very low: peak con-
centrations, which occur between 30 min and 2 h after consump-
tion, are on the order of a few tens of nanomoles per liter for an
intake of 110–200 mg anthocyanins (215–217). Similarly, the
intake of 25 mg secoisolariciresinol diglucoside in the form of
linseed produces only a slight increase (30 nmol/L) in plasma
lignan concentrations, and this increase occurs gradually be-
tween 9 and 24 h (218). Isoflavones are certainly the best ab-
sorbed flavonoids: plasma concentrations of 1.4–4 mol/L are
obtained between 6 and 8 h in adults who consume relatively low
quantities of soya derivatives supplying 50 mg isoflavones
(219–221). This raises the question of the harmlessness of
soymilk, which is consumed in large quantities by infants who
are allergic to cow milk. In 4-mo-old infants, isoflavone intake
can reach 50 mg/d, which, when expressed relative to body
weight, is 5–10-fold the dose shown to exert a physiologic effect
on the hormonal regulation of women’s menstrual cycles (222).
Plasma concentrations of genistein and daidzein in these infants
can reach several micromoles per liter (223).
Tissue uptake
Determination of the actual bioavailability of polyphenol me-
tabolites in tissues may be much more important than is knowl-
edge of their plasma concentrations. Data are still very scarce,
even in animals.
When single doses of radiolabeled polyphenols (quercetin,
epigallocatechin gallate, quercetin 4'-glucoside, resveratrol) are
given to rats or mice killed 1–6 h later, radioactivity is mainly
recoveredinbloodandintissuesofthedigestivesystem,suchasthe
stomach, intestine, and liver (224–227). However, polyphenols
have been detected by HPLC analysis in a wide range of tissues in
mice and rats, including brain (228, 229), endothelial cells (230),
heart, kidney, spleen, pancreas, prostate, uterus, ovary, mammary
gland, testes, bladder, bone, and skin (225, 231–233). The concen-
trationsobtainedinthesetissuesrangedfrom30to3000ngaglycone
equivalents/g tissue depending on the dose administered and the
tissue considered. The time of tissue sampling may be of great
importance because we have no idea of the kinetics of penetration
and elimination of polyphenols in the tissues.
It is still difficult to say whether some polyphenols accumulate
inspecifictargetorgans.Afewstudiesseemtoindicatethatsome
cells may readily incorporate polyphenols by specific mecha-
nisms. The endothelium is likely to be one of the primary sites of
flavonoid action. Schramm et al (234) showed that a rapid,
energy-dependent transport system is active in aortic endothelial
cells for the uptake of morin. This system may also transport
other hydroxylated phenolic compounds. Microautoradiography
of mice tissues after administration of radiolabeled epigallocat-
echin gallate or resveratrol indicated that radioactivity is un-
equally incorporated into the cells of organs (225, 227). Regional
selectivity has also been observed in the prostate and the brain.
After 9 wk of feeding isoflavone aglycones to rats, accumulation
of isoflavones in the dorsolateral zone of the prostate was shown
to be 4-fold that in the ventral zone of this organ (235). Similarly,
after 28 d of oral administration of tangeretin, a polymethoxy-
latedflavonefromCitrus,torats,tangeretinconcentrationsinthe
brain were 6-fold those in other tissues (heart, lung, liver, kid-
ney), and distribution of tangeretin was unequal in the various
zones of the brain: concentrations in the hypothalamus, hip-
pocampus, and striatum were 10-fold those in the brainstem and
cerebellum (228).
The nature of the tissular metabolites may be different from
that of blood metabolites because of the specific uptake or elim-
ination of some of the tissular metabolites or because of intra-
cellular metabolism. Youdim et al (236) showed that the uptake
of flavanone glucuronides by rat and mouse brain endothelial
cultured cells is much lower than that of their corresponding
aglycones. In rats fed a genistein-supplemented diet, the fraction
of genistein present in the aglycone form was much more im-
portant in several tissues than in blood. It accounted for 50% of
the total genistein metabolites in mammary gland (237), uterus,
and ovary and 100% in the brain (231) and prostate (238),
whereas it represented only 8% of the total plasma metabolites.
Only 2 studies reported data on polyphenol concentrations in
human tissues. The first study measured phytoestrogens in hu-
man prostate tissue. Surprisingly, the study showed significantly
lower prostatic concentrations of genistein in men with benign
prostatic hyperplasia than in those with a normal prostate,
whereas plasma genistein concentrations were higher in men
with benign prostatic hyperplasia (239). In addition, concentra-
tions of enterodiol and enterolactone were higher in prostatic
tissue than in plasma, whereas the opposite was true for daidzein,
genistein, and equol. In the other study, equol concentrations in
women who ingested isoflavones were found to be higher in
breast tissue than in serum, whereas genistein and daidzein were
more concentrated in serum than in breast tissue. Note that very
high equol concentrations have been obtained in breast tissue,
and these concentrations are equivalent to 6 mol/L for an intake
of 110 mg of its precursor, daidzein (240). These initial studies
show that plasma concentrations are not directly correlated with
concentrations in target tissues and that the distribution between
blood and tissues differs between the various polyphenols. This
raisesthequestionofwhetherplasmaconcentrationsareaccurate
biomarkers of exposure.
Elimination
Metabolites of polyphenols may follow 2 pathways of excre-
tion, ie, via the biliary or the urinary route. Large, extensively
conjugated metabolites are more likely to be eliminated in the
bile, whereas small conjugates such as monosulfates are prefer-
entially excreted in urine. In laboratory animals, the relative
magnitude of urinary and biliary excretion varies from one poly-
phenol to another (182). Biliary excretion seems to be a major
pathway for the elimination of genistein, epigallocatechin gal-
late, and eriodictyol (170, 241). Biliary excretion of polyphenols
in humans may differ greatly from that in rats because of the
existence of the gall bladder in humans; however, this has never
been examined. Intestinal bacteria possess -glucuronidases that
are able to release free aglycones from conjugated metabolites
secreted in bile. Aglycones can be reabsorbed, which results in
enterohepatic cycling. Pharmacokinetic studies in rats have
shown a second maximum plasma concentration 7 h after
genistein administration, which is consistent with enterohepatic
circulation (233). A second plasma peak was also observed in
some human volunteers 10–12 h after ingestion of hesperetin
from orange juice or of isoflavones from soya (101, 189, 221).
Urinaryexcretionhasoftenbeendeterminedinhumanstudies.
The total amount of metabolites excreted in urine is roughly
correlated with maximum plasma concentrations. It is quite high
738
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

for flavanones from citrus fruit (4–30% of intake), especially for
naringenin from grapefruit juice (111, 189, 214, 242, 243), and is
even higher for isoflavones: the percentages excreted are 16–
66% for daidzein and 10–24% for genistein (103, 192, 219, 221,
244). It may appear surprising that plasma concentrations of
genistein are generally higher than those of daidzein despite the
higher urinary excretion of daidzein, but this can be explained by
the efficient biliary excretion of genistein. Urinary excretion
percentages may be very low for other polyphenols, such as
anthocyanins (0.005–0.1% of intake) (113, 216, 217, 245, 246),
although Lapidot et al (247) reported elevated percentages of
anthocyanin excretion (up to 5%) after red wine consumption.
Low values could be indicative of pronounced biliary excretion
or extensive metabolism. Certain metabolites of anthocyanins
may still be unidentified as a result of analytic difficulties with
these unstable compounds. Felgines et al (248) reported that the
major metabolites of pelargonidin 3-glucoside that are recovered
in human urine after strawberry intake are glucurono- and sul-
foconjugates of pelargonidin that are extensively degraded by
simple freezing of the urine samples. Urinary excretion of fla-
vonols accounts for 0.3–1.4% of the ingested dose for quercetin
and its glycosides (90, 92, 93) but reaches 3.6% when purified
glucosides are given in hydroalcoholic solution to fasted volun-
teers (99). Urinary recovery is 0.5–6% for some tea catechins
(210, 249), 2–10% for red wine catechin (138), and up to 30% for
cocoa epicatechin (190). For caffeic and ferulic acids, relative
urinary excretion ranges from 5.9% to 27% (124, 130, 250)
The exact half-lives of polyphenols in plasma have rarely been
calculated with great precision but are on the order of 2 h for
compounds such as anthocyanins (217) and 2–3 h for flavanols
(17, 164, 251, 252), except for epigallocatechin gallate, which is
eliminated more slowly probably because of higher biliary ex-
cretion or greater complexing with plasma proteins, as described
for galloylated compounds (253, 254). The half-lives of isofla-
vones and quercetin are on the order of 4–8 (25, 244, 255) and
11–28 (90, 92) h, respectively. This suggests that maintenance of
high plasma concentrations of flavonoid metabolites could be
achieved with regular and frequent consumption of plant prod-
ucts. For instance, consumption of onions 3 times/d favors ac-
cumulationofquercetininplasma(256).Forcompounds,suchas
teacatechins,withrapidabsorptionandashorthalf-life,repeated
intakes must be very close together in time to obtain an accumu-
lation of metabolites in plasma (257); otherwise, plasma concen-
trations regularly fluctuate after repeated ingestions, and no final
accumulation occurs (205).
Biological effects of polyphenol metabolites
The biological activities of polyphenols have often been eval-
uated in vitro on pure enzymes, cultured cells, or isolated tissues
by using polyphenol aglycones or some glycosides that are
present in food. Very little is known about the biological prop-
erties of the conjugated derivatives present in plasma or tissues
because of the lack of precise identification and commercial
standards. However, reflection on the antioxidative activity of
polyphenols suggests that the metabolism of polyphenols may
have a considerable effect. For example, the hydrophobicity of
polyphenols is intermediate between that of vitamin C (highly
hydrophilic) and that of vitamin E (highly hydrophobic). Poly-
phenols are thus expected to act at water-lipid interfaces and may
be involved in oxidation regeneration pathways with vitamins C
and E. Glucuronidation and sulfation render polyphenols more
hydrophilic and can affect their site of action and their interac-
tions with other antioxidants. Furthermore, their intrinsic reduc-
tive capacity may be changed. The antioxidant effect of conju-
gated derivatives of quercetin on copper ion–induced LDL
oxidation in vitro is about one-half that of the aglycone and is
dependent on the binding site of the glucuronic acid (107, 176,
258). Cren-Olive et al (259) also reported that the capacity of
3'-O-methylcatechin and 4'-O-methylcatechin to protect LDL
from in vitro oxidation is lower than that of catechin. However,
an increase in the antioxidant capacity of plasma was observed
after the consumption of various polyphenol-rich foods, which
indirectly shows that at least some of the polyphenol metabolites
retain antioxidant activity (212, 260–264). Conjugation might
enhance certain specific biological activities, as shown for some
xenobiotics (265). Koga and Meydani (266) showed that plasma
metabolites of catechin have an inhibitory effect on monocyte
adhesion to interleukin 1–stimulated human aortic endothelial
cells, whereas catechin and metabolites of quercetin had no ef-
fect. In another in vitro study, quercetin 3-O-glucuronide pre-
vented vascular smooth muscle cell hypertrophy by angiotensin
II (267). However, conjugation seems instead to decrease the
specific activities of polyphenols. The affinities for estrogenic
receptors of the aglycones of daidzein and genistein are 10- and
40-fold, respectively, those of the respective glucuronides, but
the glucuronides still show weak estrogenic activity at physio-
logic concentrations (268). Spencer et al (269) showed the in-
ability of 5- and 7-O-glucuronides of epicatechin to protect fi-
broblasts and neuronal cells from oxidative stress in vitro,
whereas epicatechin and methylepicatechin were protective.
Nevertheless, it is still difficult to draw any conclusions from the
few existing studies regarding the effects of the type and position
of conjugation on the various potential activities of polyphenols.
Polyphenol metabolites could also exert biological activities
after deconjugation at the cellular level. This possibility has been
shown for sulfates and glucuronides of endogenous estrogens
(270, 271). Quercetin glucuronides were hydrolyzed by cell-free
extracts of human neutrophils, liver, and small intestine (272).
However, the possibility of hydrolysis of flavonoid glucuronides
inside cells has not been studied. We have seen above that the
proportion of free aglycone in some tissues may be higher than
that in blood, especially in the case of genistein in rats. This may
be explained by specific uptake of the aglycone or intracellular
deconjugation. This last hypothesis implies that anionic conju-
gates could be transported across plasma membranes via carrier
systems, as shown for other glucuronides (184, 273). Further-
more,-glucuronidaseislocatedinthelumenoftheendoplasmic
reticulum in various organs and would also have to be reached by
polyphenol glucuronides. Note that carrier-mediated bidirec-
tional transport across the membrane of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum in rat hepatocytes has been described for other glucuronides,
such as estrogen glucuronides (274). Inside the endoplasmic
reticulum, UDP-glucuronosyltransferases are present along with
-glucuronidase. The respective Km values of these enzymes
toward flavonoids and their glucuronides seem to be in favor of
glucuronidation rather than deglucuronidation at physiologic pH
values (176, 272). These results are not consistent enough to give
aclearviewofwhatoccursinsidethecells,andadditionalstudies
are certainly needed. -Glucuronidase is also present in the ly-
sosomes of various cells, from which it can be released in some
particular situations such as oxidative stress. Its activity in-
creases in some physiopathologic states, such as inflammation,
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
739
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

cancer, and AIDS (275, 276). Luteolin 7-O-glucuronide is hy-
drolyzed into aglycone by lysosomal -glucuronidase released
from neutrophils after induction of inflammation and in the
plasma of rats treated with lipopolysaccharide (277). In situ de-
conjugation of polyphenol metabolites might occur only in par-
ticular places, such as at inflammation sites or in tumors. Situa-
tions that decrease the pH would favor deglucuronidation
because the activity of -glucuronidase is optimal at pH 4–5 and
is reduced 9-fold at neutral pH (275).
Polyphenolsmayalsohaveanindirecteffectonhealthbecause
they are metabolized by the same pathways as various xenobi-
otics or endogenous hormones. Flavonoids such as quercetin and
fisetin are better substrates for catechol-O-methyl transferase
than are its endogenous substrates, catecholamines and catechol
estrogens. Deregulation of the O-methylation metabolism of
neurotransmitters and hormones in humans is an important risk
factor for the development of some neurodegenerative diseases,
cardiovascular diseases, and hormone-dependent cancers (278).
Thus, if confirmed in humans, the potential competitive inhibi-
tion
of
the
catechol-O-methyl
transferase–catalyzed
O-methylation of endogenous catecholamines and catechol es-
trogens by polyphenols with catechol groups may have a bene-
ficial effect on these pathologies. Some polyphenols, such as
quercetin and daidzein sulfoconjugates, are also efficient inhib-
itors of sulfotransferases (279–282) and thus may have an effect
on the function of thyroid hormones, steroids, and cat-
echolamines(283).WhetherUDP-glucuronosyltransferaseisin-
duced or inhibited by polyphenols needs further investigation
(284–286). Interactions with drug transporters should also be
considered (287). Isoflavones were shown to interact with trans-
porters such as P-glycoprotein and canalicular multispecific or-
ganic anion transporter (288). Furthermore, some flavonoids
could act as cytochrome P450 inhibitors and enhance drug bio-
availability. Increased concentrations of many drugs have been
shown with coadministrated grapefruit juice, and the effect was
attributed in part to inhibition of the intestinal cytochrome P450
isoform 3A4 by naringenin (289). These data suggest that poly-
phenols could affect the bioavailability of many carcinogens,
other toxic chemicals, and therapeutic drugs by affecting the
activities of various enzymes involved in their own metabolism.
CONCLUSION
The many analytic studies of polyphenols in foods that have
been conducted to date provide a good indication of polyphenol
distribution. Fruit and beverages such as tea, red wine, and coffee
constitute the principal sources of polyphenols, but vegetables,
leguminousplants,andcerealsarealsogoodsources.Polyphenol
concentrations in foods vary according to numerous genetic,
environmental, and technologic factors, some of which may be
controlled to optimize the polyphenol content of foods. The main
tasks ahead are identifying the plant varieties that are the richest
in the polyphenols of interest, improving growing methods, and
limiting losses during the course of industrial processing and
domestic cooking.
The health effects of polyphenols depend on both their respec-
tive intakes and their bioavailability, which can vary greatly.
Although very abundant in our diet, proanthocyanidins are either
very poorly absorbed or not absorbed at all, and their action is
thus restricted to the intestine. The same appears to be true for
anthocyanins, unless some of their metabolites are not yet iden-
tified but are well absorbed. Intakes of monomeric flavonols,
flavones, and flavanols are relatively low, and plasma concen-
trations rarely exceed 1 mol/L because of limited absorption
and rapid elimination. Flavanones and isoflavones are the fla-
vonoids with the best bioavailability profiles, and plasma con-
centrations may reach 5 mol/L. However, the distribution of
these substances is restricted to citrus fruit and soya. Finally,
hydroxycinnamicacidsarefoundinawidevarietyoffoods,often
at high concentrations, but esterification decreases their intesti-
nal absorption. As a general rule, the metabolites of polyphenols
are rapidly eliminated from plasma, which indicates that con-
sumption of plant products on a daily basis is necessary to main-
tain high concentrations of metabolites in the blood.
Recent studies have greatly increased our knowledge of the
plasma concentrations and urinary excretion of polyphenol me-
tabolites in humans. However, values for these variables do not
seem to be well correlated with concentrations measured in tis-
sues. Available data, essentially those obtained from animal
studies, indicate that some polyphenol metabolites may accumu-
late in certain target tissues rather than just equilibrate between
blood and tissues. The metabolites present may differ between
tissues and plasma, and the nature of these metabolites needs to
be further elucidated. More animal studies are needed to inves-
tigate intracellular metabolism and the accumulation of polyphe-
nol metabolites in specific organs. However, some important
differences may exist between animals and humans in some
metabolic processes, especially the conjugation process.
The notion of bioavailability integrates several variables, such
as intestinal absorption, excretion of glucuronides toward the
intestinal lumen, metabolism by the microflora, intestinal and
hepatic metabolism, plasma kinetics, the nature of circulating
metabolites, binding to albumin, cellular uptake, intracellular
metabolism, accumulation in tissues, and biliary and urinary
excretion. The difficulty lies in integrating all the information
and relating the variables to health effects at the organ level.
These tasks are made all the more difficult because the relative
weight of each variable may depend on the polyphenol consid-
ered.Somepolyphenolsmaybelessefficientlyabsorbedthanare
others but nevertheless reach equivalent plasma concentrations
because of lower secretion toward the intestinal lumen and lower
metabolism and elimination.
Better knowledge of bioavailability is essential for investigat-
ing the health effects of polyphenols, whatever the approach
used. The fact that aglycones are not important metabolites in
bloodbecauseofextensiveintestinalandhepaticconjugationhas
thus far been largely ignored, and many in vitro studies on the
mechanisms of action of polyphenols continue to concentrate on
aglycones or glycosides rather than on the identified metabolites,
often at concentrations that cannot realistically be attained in the
body. It is thus essential to confirm the effects observed with
aglycones through studies using physiologic concentrations of
the metabolites actually found in the body. In addition, the ac-
tivities of microbial metabolites must be examined in further
studies to determine active structures, available concentrations,
and potential modulation of the capacity of the microflora to
produce such metabolites. Clinical studies will be of great help in
investigating the health effect of polyphenols, provided that
markers of effects that are reliable and related to the prevention
of diseases are available. Better knowledge of some variables of
polyphenol bioavailability, such as the kinetics of absorption,
accumulation, and elimination, will facilitate the design of such
740
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

studies. Besides, more precise data on the nature of the circulat-
ing metabolites and on metabolism by the microflora can now be
used for interpretations. For example, taking into account
whether subjects are equol producers or non–equol producers
seems particularly judicious in evaluating the health effects of
soya isoflavone consumption.
Research on polyphenol bioavailability must finally allow us
to correlate polyphenol intakes with one or several accurate mea-
sures of bioavailability (such as concentrations of key bioactive
metabolites in plasma and tissues) and with potential health ef-
fects in epidemiologic studies. Knowledge of these correlations
must be attained despite the difficulties linked to the high diver-
sity of polyphenols, their different bioavailabilities, and the high
interindividual variability observed in some metabolic pro-
cesses, especially those in which the microflora is involved.
REFERENCES
1. Middleton E, Kandaswami C, Theoharides TC. The effects of plant
flavonoids on mammalian cells: implications for inflammation, heart
disease, and cancer. Pharmacol Rev 2000;52:673–751.
2. Shahidi F, Naczk M. Food phenolics, sources, chemistry, effects, ap-
plications. Lancaster, PA: Technomic Publishing Co Inc, 1995.
3. Tomas-Barberan FA, Clifford MN. Dietary hydroxybenzoic acid de-
rivatives and their possible role in health protection. J Sci Food Agric
2000;80:1024–32.
4. Clifford MN, Scalbert A. Ellagitannins—occurrence in food, bioavail-
ability and cancer prevention. J Food Sci Agric 2000;80:1118–25.
5. Clifford MN. Chlorogenic acids and other cinnamates—nature, oc-
curence and dietary burden. J Sci Food Agric 1999;79:362–72.
6. Macheix J-J, Fleuriet A, Billot J. Fruit phenolics. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 1990.
7. Dao L, Friedman M. Chlorogenic acid content of fresh and processed
potatoes determined by ultraviolet spectrophotometry. J Agric Food
Chem 1992;40:2152–6.
8. Kuhnau J. The flavonoids. A class of semi-essential food components:
their role in human nutrition. World Rev Nutr Diet 1976;24:117–91.
9. Mazza G, Maniati E. Anthocyanins in fruits, vegetables, and grains.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1993.
10. Clifford MN. Anthocyanins—nature, occurrence and dietary burden. J
Food Sci Agric 2000;80:1063–72.
11. Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, Katan MB. Content of potentially anti-
carcinogenic flavonoids of 28 vegetables and 9 fruits commonly con-
sumed in the Netherlands. J Agric Food Chem 1992;40:2379–83.
12. Justesen U, Knuthsen P, Leth T. Quantitative analysis of flavonols,
flavones, and flavanones in fruits, vegetables and beverages by high-
performance liquid chromatography with photo-diode array and mass
spectrometric detection. J Chromatogr A 1998;799:101–10.
13. Price KR, Rhodes MJC. Analysis of the major flavonol glycosides
present in four varieties of onion (Allium cepa) and changes in com-
position resulting from autolysis. J Sci Food Agric 1997;74:331–9.
14. Herrmann K. Flavonols and flavones in food plants: a review. J Food
Technol 1976;11:433–48.
15. Simonetti P, Pietta P, Testolin G. Polyphenol content and total antiox-
idant potential of selected Italian wines. J Agric Food Chem 1997;45:
1152–5.
16. Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, van de Putte B. Content of potentially
anticarcinogenic flavonoids in tea infusions, wine and fruit juices. J
Agric Food Chem 1993;41:1242–6.
17. Hollman PCH, Arts ICW. Flavonols, flavones and flavanols—nature,
occurrence and dietary burden. J Food Sci Agric 2000;80:1081–93.
18. CrozierA,LeanMEJ,McDonaldMS,BlackC.Quantitativeanalysisof
the flavonoid content of commercial tomatoes, onions, lettuce, and
celery. J Agric Food Chem 1997;45:590–5.
19. Mouly PP, Arzouyan CR, Gaydou EM, Estienne JM. Differentiation of
citrus juices by factorial discriminant analysis using liquid chromatog-
raphy of flavanone glycosides. J Agric Food Chem 1994;42:70–9.
20. Tomas-Barberan FA, Clifford MN. Flavanones, chalcones and dihy-
drochalcones—nature, occurence and dietary burden. J Sci Food Agric
2000;80:1073–80.
21. Rousseff RL, Martin SF, Youtsey CO. Quantitative survey of narirutin,
naringin, heperidin, and neohesperidin in Citrus. J Agric Food Chem
1987;35:1027–30.
22. Franke AA, Hankin JH, Yu MC, Maskarinec G, Low SH, Custer LJ.
Isoflavone levels in soy foods consumed by multiethnic populations in
Singapore and Hawaii. J Agric Food Chem 1999;47:977–86.
23. Coward L, Barnes NC, Setchell KDR, Barnes S. Genistein, daidzein,
and their beta-glycoside conjugates: antitumor isoflavones in soybean
foods from American and Asian diets. J Agric Food Chem 1993;41:
1961–7.
24. Franke AA, Custer LJ, Cerna CM, Narala KK. Quantification of
phytoestrogens in legumes by HPLC. J Agric Food Chem 1994;42:
1905–13.
25. Cassidy A, Hansley B, Lamuela-Raventos RM. Isoflavones, lignans
andstilbenes—origins,metabolismandpotentialimportancetohuman
health. J Sci Food Agric 2000;80:1044–62.
26. dePascualTeresa S, SantosBuelga C, RivasGonzalo JC. Quantitative
analysis of flavan-3-ols in Spanish foodstuffs and beverages. J Agric
Food Chem 2000;48:5331–7.
27. Arts ICW, van de Putte B, Hollman PCH. Catechin contents of foods
commonly consumed in The Netherlands. 1. Fruits, vegetables, staple
foods, and processed foods. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:1746–51.
28. Sosulski F, Krygier K, Hogge L. Free, esterified, and insoluble-bound
phenolic acids. 3. Composition of phenolic acids in cereal and potato
flours. J Agric Food Chem 1982;30:337–40.
29. Lempereur I, Rouau X, Abecassis J. Genetic and agronomic variation
in arabinoxylan and ferulic acid contents of durum wheat (Triticum
durum L.) grain and its milling fractions. J Cereal Sci 1997;25:103–10.
30. Hatcher DW, Kruger JE. Simple phenolic acids in flours prepared from
Canadian wheat: relationship to ash content, color, and polyphenol
oxidase activity. Cereal Chem 1997;74:337–43.
31. Price SF, Breen PJ, Valladao M, Watson BT. Cluster sun exposure
and quercetin in Pinot noir grapes and wine. Am J Enol Vitic 1995;46:
187–94.
32. King HGC. Phenolic compounds of commercial wheat germ. J Food
Sci 1962;27:446–54.
33. Feng Y, McDonald CE, Vick BA. C-glycosylflavones from hard red
spring wheat bran. Cereal Chem 1988;65:452–6.
34. Sartelet H, Serghat S, Lobstein A, et al. Flavonoids extracted from
Fonio millet (Digitaria exilis) reveal potent antithyroid properties.
Nutrition 1996;12:100–6.
35. Coward L, Smith M, Kirk M, Barnes S. Chemical modification of
isoflavones in soyfoods during cooking and processing. Am J Clin Nutr
1998;68(suppl):1486S–91S.
36. Kudou S, Fleury Y, Welti D, et al. Malonyl isoflavone glycosides in
soybean seeds (Glycine max MERRILL). Agric Biol Chem 1991;55:
2227–33.
37. Reinli K, Block G. Phytoestrogen content of foods—a compendium of
literature values. Nutr Cancer 1996;26:123–48.
38. Lakenbrink C, Lapczynski S, Maiwald B, Engelhardt UH. Flavonoids
and other polyphenols in consumer brews of tea and other caffeinated
beverages. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:2848–52.
39. Arts IC, van De Putte B, Hollman PC. Catechin contents of foods
commonly consumed in The Netherlands. 2. Tea, wine, fruit juices, and
chocolate milk. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:1752–7.
40. ZhuQY,ZhangAQ,TsangD,HuangY,ChenZY.Stabilityofgreentea
catechins. J Agric Food Chem 1997;45:4624–8.
41. Guyot S, Marnet N, Laraba D, Sanoner P, Drilleau J-F. Reversed-phase
HPLC following thiolysis for quantitative estimation and characteriza-
tion of the four main classes of phenolic compounds in different tissue
zones of a French cider apple variety (Malus domestica Var. Kermer-
rien). J Agric Food Chem 1998;46:1698–705.
42. Santos-Buelga C, Scalbert A. Proanthocyanidins and tannin-like com-
pounds: nature, occurrence, dietary intake and effects on nutrition and
health. J Sci Food Agric 2000;80:1094–117.
43. Tanaka T, Takahashi R, Kouno I, Nonaka G. Chemical evidence for the
de-astringency(insolubilizationoftannins)ofpersimmonfruit.JChem
Soc [Perkin 1] 1994;3013–22.
44. Es-Safi NE, Cheynier V, Moutounet M. Interactions between cyanidin
3-O-glucoside and furfural derivatives and their impact on food color
changes. J Agric Food Chem 2002;50:5586–95.
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
741
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

45. Adlercreutz H, Mazur W. Phyto-oestrogens and Western diseases. Ann
Med 1997;29:95–120.
46. Heinonen S, Nurmi T, Liukkonen K, et al. In vitro metabolism of plant
lignans: new precursors of mammalian lignans enterolactone and en-
terodiol. J Agric Food Chem 2001;49:3178–86.
47. Thompson LU, Robb P, Serraino M, Cheung F. Mammalian lignan
production from various foods. Nutr Cancer 1991;16:43–52.
48. Bertelli A, Bertelli AAE, Gozzini A, Giovannini L. Plasma and tissue
resveratrol concentrations and pharmacological activity. Drugs Exp
Clin Res 1998;24:133–8.
49. Bhat KP, Pezzuto JM. Cancer chemopreventive activity of resveratrol.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002;957:210–29.
50. Vitrac X, Moni JP, Vercauteren J, Deffieux G, Mérillon JM. Direct
liquid chromatography analysis of resveratrol derivatives and fla-
vanonols in wines with absorbance and fluorescence detection. Anal
Chim Acta 2002;458:103–10.
51. Sanoner P, Guyot S, Marnet N, Molle D, Drilleau J-F. Polyphenol
profiles of French cider apple varieties (Malus domestica sp. ). J Agric
Food Chem 1999;47:4847–53.
52. Parr AJ, Bolwell GP. Phenols in the plant and in man. The potential for
possible nutritional enhancement of the diet by modifying the phenol
content or profile. J Agric Food Chem 2000;80:985–1012.
53. AsamiDK,HongYJ,BarrettDM,MitchellAE.Comparisonofthetotal
phenolic and ascorbic acid content of freeze-dried and air-dried mari-
onberry, strawberry, and corn grown using conventional, organic,
and sustainable agricultural practices. J Agric Food Chem 2003;51:
1237–41.
54. Clifford MN. Chlorogenic acids and other cinnamates—nature, oc-
curence, dietary burden, absorption and metabolism. J Sci Food Agric
2000;80:1033–43.
55. Burda S, Oleszek W, Lee CY. Phenolic compounds and their changes
in apples during maturation and cold storage. J Agric Food Chem
1990;38:945–8.
56. van der Sluis AA, Dekker M, de Jager A, Jongen WM. Activity and
concentration of polyphenolic antioxidants in apple: effect of cultivar,
harvest year, and storage conditions. J Agric Food Chem 2001;49:
3606–13.
57. Spanos GA, Wrolstad RE. Phenolics of apple, pear, and white grape
juice and their changes with processing and storage—a review. J Agric
Food Chem 1992;40:1478–87.
58. Price KR, Bacon JR, Rhodes MJC. Effect of storage and domestic
processing on the content and composition of flavonol glucosides in
onion (Allium cepa). J Agric Food Chem 1997;45:938–42.
59. SpanosGA,WrolstadRE,HeatherbellDA.Influenceofprocessingand
storage on the phenolic composition of apple juice. J Agric Food Chem
1990;38:1572–9.
60. Miller NJ, Diplock AT, Rice-Evans CA. Evaluation of the total anti-
oxidant activity as a marker of the deterioration of apple juice on
storage. J Agric Food Chem 1995;43:1794–801.
61. Friedman M. Chemistry, biochemistry, and dietary role of potato poly-
phenols. A review. J Agric Food Chem 1997;45:1523–40.
62. Macheix JJ, Fleuriet A. Phenolic acids in fruits. In: Rice-Evans C,
Packer L, eds. Flavonoids in health and disease. New York: Marcel
Dekker, Inc, 1998:35–59.
63. Vinson JA, Hontz BA. Phenol antioxidant index: comparative antiox-
idant effectiveness of red and white wines. J Agric Food Chem 1995;
43:401–3.
64. Abu-Amsha Caccetta AR, Croft KD, Puddey IB, Proudfoot JM, Beilin
LJ. Phenolic content of various beverages determines the extent of
inhibition of human serum and low-density lipoprotein oxidation in
vitro: identification and mechanism of action of some cinnamic acid
derivatives from red wine. Clin Sci 1996;91:449–58.
65. Radtke J, Linseisen J, Wolfram G. Phenolic acid intake of adults in a
Bavarian subgroup of the national food composition survey. Z Ernahr-
ungswiss 1998;37:190–7.
66. US Department of Agriculture. USDA database for the flavonoid con-
tent of selected foods. March 2003. Internet: http://www.nal.usda.gov/
fnic/foodcomp/ (accessed 20 May 2003).
67. Sampson L, Rimm E, Hollman PC, de Vries JH, Katan MB. Flavonol
and flavone intakes in US health professionals. J Am Diet Assoc 2002;
102:1414–20.
68. Justesen U, Knuthsen P, Leth T. Determination of plant polyphenols in
Danish foodstuffs by HPLC-UV and LC-MS detection. Cancer Lett
1997;114:165–7.
69. Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, Katan MB, Kromhout D. Intake of po-
tentially anticarcinogenic flavonoids and their determinants in adults in
The Netherlands. Nutr Cancer 1993;20:21–9.
70. Pietta P, Simonetti P, Roggi C, et al. Dietary flavonoids and oxidative
stress. In: Kumpulainen JT, Salonen JT, eds. Natural antioxidants and
food quality in atherosclerosis and cancer prevention. London: Royal
Society of Chemistry, 1996:249–55.
71. Kumpulainen JT. Intake of flavonoids, phenolic acids and lignans in
various populations. In: Voutilainen S, Salonen JT, eds. Third interna-
tional conference on natural antioxidants and anticarcinogens in food,
health, and disease (NAHD), June 6–9, 2001, Helsinki, Finland. Hel-
sinki: Kuopion Yliopisto, 2001:24.
72. Heinonen M. Anthocyanins as dietary antioxidants. In: Voutilainen S,
Salonen JT, eds. Third international conference on natural antioxidants
and anticarcinogens in food, health, and disease (NAHD), June 6–9,
2001, Helsinki, Finland. Helsinki: Kuopion Yliopisto, 2001:25.
73. Adlercreutz H, Honjo H, Higashi A, et al. Urinary excretion of lignans
and isoflavonoid phytoestrogens in Japanese men and women consum-
ing a traditional Japanese diet. Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54:1093–100.
74. Kimira M, Arai Y, Shimoi K, Watanabe S. Japanese intake of fla-
vonoids and isoflavonoids from foods. J Epidemiol 1998;8:168–75.
75. Bennetau-Pelissero C. Les phyto-oestrogènes dans l’alimentation et la
thérapie: discussion. Cah Nutr Diet 2001;36:25–38.
76. de Pascual-Teresa S. Analisis de taninos condensados en alimentos.
[Analysis of condensed tannins in food.] PhD thesis. Universidad de
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 1999 (in Spanish).
77. Erlund I, Silaste ML, Alfthan G, Rantala M, Kesaniemi YA, Aro A.
Plasma concentrations of the flavonoids hesperetin, naringenin and
quercetin in human subjects following their habitual diets, and diets
high or low in fruit and vegetables. Eur J Clin Nutr 2002;56:891–8.
78. Radtke J, Linseisen J, Wolfram G. Fasting plasma concentrations of
selected flavonoids as markers of their ordinary dietary intake. Eur J
Nutr 2002;41:203–9.
79. Noroozi M, Burns J, Crozier A, Kelly IE, Lean ME. Prediction of
dietary flavonol consumption from fasting plasma concentration or
urinary excretion. Eur J Clin Nutr 2000;54:143–9.
80. SeowA,ShiCY,FrankeAA,HankinJH,LeeHP,YuMC.Isoflavonoid
levels in spot urine are associated with frequency of dietary soy intake
in a population-based sample of middle-aged and older Chinese in
Singapore. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1998;7:135–40.
81. Chen Z, Zheng W, Custer LJ, et al. Usual dietary consumption of soy
foods and its correlation with the excretion rate of isoflavonoids in
overnight urine samples among Chinese women in Shanghai. Nutr
Cancer 1999;33:82–7.
82. Atkinson C, Skor HE, Fitzgibbons ED, et al. Overnight urinary isofla-
voneexcretioninapopulationofwomenlivingintheUnitedStates,and
its relationship to isoflavone intake. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 2002;11:253–60.
83. Scalbert A, Williamson G. Dietary intake and bioavailability of poly-
phenols. J Nutr 2000;130:2073S–85S.
84. Ader P, Grenacher B, Langguth P, Scharrer E, Wolffram S. Cinnamate
uptake by rat small intestine: transport kinetics and transepithelial
transfer. Exp Physiol 1996;81:943–55.
85. Crespy V, Morand C, Besson C, Manach C, Demigne C, Remesy C.
Quercetin, but not its glycosides, is absorbed from the rat stomach. J
Agric Food Chem 2002;50:618–21.
86. Piskula MK, Yamakoshi J, Iwai Y. Daidzein and genistein but not their
glucosides are absorbed from the rat stomach. FEBS Lett 1999;447:
287–91.
87. Gee JM, Du Pont MS, Rhodes MJC, Johnson IT. Quercetin glucosides
interact with the intestinal glucose transport pathway. Free Radic Biol
Med 1998;25:19–25.
88. Manach C, Morand C, Texier O, et al. Quercetin metabolites in plasma
ofratsfeddietscontainingrutinorquercetin.JNutr1995;125:1911–22.
89. Hollman PC, Katan MB. Absorption, metabolism and health effects of
dietary flavonoids in man. Biomed Pharmacother 1997;51:305–10.
90. Graefe EU, Wittig J, Mueller S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and bioavail-
ability of quercetin glycosides in humans. J Clin Pharmacol 2001;41:
492–9.
91. Hollman PC, Bijsman MN, van Gameren Y, Cnossen EP, de Vries JH,
Katan MB. The sugar moiety is a major determinant of the absorption of
dietary flavonoid glycosides in man. Free Radic Res 1999;31:569–73.
742
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

92. Hollman PCH, van Trijp JMP, Buysman MNCP, et al. Relative bio-
availabilityoftheantioxidantflavonoidquercetinfromvariousfoodsin
man. FEBS Lett 1997;418:152–6.
93. Hollman PCH, Devries JHM, Vanleeuwen SD, Mengelers MJB, Katan
MB. Absorption of dietary quercetin glycosides and quercetin in
healthy ileostomy volunteers. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:1276–82.
94. Morand C, Manach C, Crespy V, Remesy C. Quercetin 3-O-beta-
glucoside is better absorbed than other quercetin forms and is not
present in rat plasma. Free Radic Res 2000;33:667–76.
95. Day AJ, DuPont MS, Ridley S, et al. Deglycosylation of flavonoid and
isoflavonoid
glycosides
by
human
small
intestine
and
liver
-glucosidase activity. FEBS Lett 1998;436:71–5.
96. Day AJ, Canada FJ, Diaz JC, et al. Dietary flavonoid and isoflavone
glycosides are hydrolysed by the lactase site of lactase phlorizin hy-
drolase. FEBS Lett 2000;468:166–70.
97. Sesink AL, Arts IC, Faassen-Peters M, Hollman PC. Intestinal uptake
ofquercetin-3-glucosideinratsinvolveshydrolysisbylactasephlorizin
hydrolase. J Nutr 2003;133:773–6.
98. Day AJ, Gee JM, DuPont MS, Johnson IT, Williamson G. Absorption
of quercetin-3-glucoside and quercetin-4'-glucoside in the rat small intes-
tine: the role of lactase phlorizin hydrolase and the sodium-dependent
glucose transporter. Biochem Pharmacol 2003;65:1199–206.
99. Olthof MR, Hollman PCH, Vree TB, Katan MB. Bioavailabilities of
quercetin-3-glucoside and quercetin-4'-glucoside do not differ in hu-
mans. J Nutr 2000;130:1200–3.
100. Hutchins AM, Slavin JL, Lampe JW. Urinary isoflavonoid phytoestro-
gen and lignan excretion after consumption of fermented and unfer-
mented soy products. J Am Diet Assoc 1995;95:545–51.
101. Setchell KD, Brown NM, Desai P, et al. Bioavailability of pure isofla-
vones in healthy humans and analysis of commercial soy isoflavone
supplements. J Nutr 2001;131:1362S–75S.
102. Izumi T, Piskula MK, Osawa S, et al. Soy isoflavone aglycones are
absorbed faster and in higher amounts than their glucosides in humans.
J Nutr 2000;130:1695–9.
103. Richelle M, Pridmore-Merten S, Bodenstab S, Enslen M, Offord EA.
Hydrolysis of isoflavone glycosides to aglycones by beta-glycosidase
does not alter plasma and urine isoflavone pharmacokinetics in post-
menopausal women. J Nutr 2002;132:2587–92.
104. Felgines C, Texier O, Morand C, et al. Bioavailability of the fla-
vanone naringenin and its glycosides in rats. Am J Physiol 2000;279:
G1148–54.
105. Crespy V, Aprikian O, Morand C, et al. Bioavailability of phloretin and
phloridzin in rats. J Nutr 2001;131:3227–30.
106. Saarinen NM, Smeds A, Makela SI, et al. Structural determinants of
plant lignans for the formation of enterolactone in vivo. J Chromatogr
B Anal Technol Biomed Life Sci 2002;777:311–9.
107. Manach C, Morand C, Crespy V, et al. Quercetin is recovered in human
plasma as conjugated derivatives which retain antioxidant properties.
FEBS Lett 1998;426:331–6.
108. Sesink AL, O’Leary KA, Hollman PC. Quercetin glucuronides but not
glucosides are present in human plasma after consumption of quercetin-
3-glucoside or quercetin-4'-glucoside. J Nutr 2001;131:1938–41.
109. Wittig J, Herderich M, Graefe EU, Veit M. Identification of quercetin
glucuronides in human plasma by high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy–tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl
2001;753:237–43.
110. Setchell KD, Brown NM, Zimmer-Nechemias L, et al. Evidence for
lack of absorption of soy isoflavone glycosides in humans, supporting
the crucial role of intestinal metabolism for bioavailability. Am J Clin
Nutr 2002;76:447–53.
111. Ishii K, Furuta T, Kasuya Y. Mass spectrometric identification and
high-performanceliquidchromatographicdeterminationofaflavonoid
glycoside naringin in human urine. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:56–9.
112. Passamonti S, Vrhovsek U, Mattivi F. The interaction of anthocyanins
withbilitranslocase.BiochemBiophysResCommun2002;296:631–6.
113. Wu X, Cao G, Prior RL. Absorption and metabolism of anthocyanins in
elderly women after consumption of elderberry or blueberry. J Nutr
2002;132:1865–71.
114. Déprez S, Mila I, Huneau J-F, Tomé D, Scalbert A. Transport of pro-
anthocyanidin dimer, trimer and polymer across monolayers of hu-
man intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells. Antioxid Redox Signal 2001;3:
957–67.
115. Baba S, Osakabe N, Natsume M, Terao J. Absorption and urinary
excretion of procyanidin B2 [epicatechin-(4beta-8)-epicatechin] in
rats. Free Radic Biol Med 2002;33:142–8.
116. Donovan JL, Manach C, Rios L, Morand C, Scalbert A, Remesy C.
Procyanidins are not bioavailable in rats fed a single meal containing a
grapeseed extract or the procyanidin dimer B3. Br J Nutr 2002;87:299–
306.
117. Spencer JP, Chaudry F, Pannala AS, Srai SK, Debnam E, Rice-Evans
C.Decompositionofcocoaprocyanidinsinthegastricmilieu.Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2000;272:236–41.
118. Rios LY, Bennett RN, Lazarus SA, Remesy C, Scalbert A, Williamson
G. Cocoa procyanidins are stable during gastric transit in humans. Am J
Clin Nutr 2002;76:1106–10.
119. Holt RR, Lazarus SA, Sullards MC, et al. Procyanidin dimer B2
[epicatechin-(4beta-8)-epicatechin] in human plasma after the con-
sumption of a flavanol-rich cocoa. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;76:798–804.
120. Halliwell B, Zhao K, Whiteman M. The gastrointestinal tract: a major
site of antioxidant action? Free Radic Res 2000;33:819–30.
121. Cremin P, Kasim-Karakas S, Waterhouse AL. LC/ES-MS detection of
hydroxycinnamates in human plasma and urine. J Agric Food Chem
2001;49:1747–50.
122. Plumb GW, Garcia-Conesa MT, Kroon PA, Rhodes M, Ridley S, Wil-
liamson G. Metabolism of chlorogenic acid by human plasma, liver,
intestine and gut microflora. J Sci Food Agric 1999;79:390–2.
123. Olthof MR, Hollman PCH, Katan MB. Chlorogenic acid and caffeic
acid are absorbed in humans. J Nutr 2001;131:66–71.
124. Rechner AR, Spencer JP, Kuhnle G, Hahn U, Rice-Evans CA. Novel
biomarkers of the metabolism of caffeic acid derivatives in vivo. Free
Radic Biol Med 2001;30:1213–22.
125. Azuma K, Ippoushi K, Nakayama M, Ito H, Higashio H, Terao J.
Absorption of chlorogenic acid and caffeic acid in rats after oral ad-
ministration. J Agric Food Chem 2000;48:5496–500.
126. Andreasen MF, Kroon PA, Williamson G, Garcia-Conesa MT. Ester-
ase activity able to hydrolyze dietary antioxidant hydroxycinnamates is
distributed along the intestine of mammals. J Agric Food Chem 2001;
49:5679–84.
127. Couteau D, McCartney AL, Gibson GR, Williamson G, Faulds CB.
Isolation and characterization of human colonic bacteria able to hydro-
lyse chlorogenic acid. J Appl Microbiol 2001;90:873–81.
128. Gonthier MP, Verny MA, Besson C, Rémésy C, Scalbert A. Chloro-
genic acid bioavailability largely depends on its metabolism by the gut
microflora in rats. J Nutr 2003;133:1853–9.
129. Nardini M, Cirillo E, Natella F, Scaccini C. Absorption of phenolic
acids in humans after coffee consumption. J Agric Food Chem 2002;
50:5735–41.
130. Bourne LC, Rice-Evans C. Bioavailability of ferulic acid. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1998;253:222–7.
131. Adam A, Crespy V, Levrat-Verny MA, et al. The bioavailability of
ferulic acid is governed primarily by the food matrix rather than its
metabolism in intestine and liver in rats. J Nutr 2002;132:1962–8.
132. Andreasen MF, Kroon PA, Williamson G, Garcia-Conesa MT. Intes-
tinal release and uptake of phenolic antioxidant diferulic acids. Free
Radic Biol Med 2001;31:304–14.
133. Serafini M, Ghiselli A, Ferro-Luzzi A. In vivo antioxidant effect of
green and black tea in man. Eur J Clin Nutr 1996;50:28–32.
134. van het Hof KH, Kivits GA, Weststrate JA, Tijburg LB. Bioavailability
of catechins from tea: the effect of milk. Eur J Clin Nutr 1998;52:
356–9.
135. Hollman PC, Van Het Hof KH, Tijburg LB, Katan MB. Addition of
milk does not affect the absorption of flavonols from tea in man. Free
Radic Res 2001;34:297–300.
136. Azuma K, Ippoushi K, Ito H, Higashio H, Terao J. Combination of
lipids and emulsifiers enhances the absorption of orally administered
quercetin in rats. J Agric Food Chem 2002;50:1706–12.
137. Donovan JL, Bell JR, Kasim-Karakas S, et al. Catechin is present as
metabolites in human plasma after consumption of red wine. J Nutr
1999;129:1662–8.
138. Donovan JL, Kasim-Karakas S, German JB, Waterhouse AL. Urinary
excretion of catechin metabolites by human subjects after red wine
consumption. Br J Nutr 2002;87:31–7.
139. Yamashita S, Sakane T, Harada M, et al. Absorption and metabolism of
antioxidative polyphenolic compounds in red wine. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2002;957:325–8.
140. Goldberg DM, Yan J, Soleas GJ. Absorption of three wine-related
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
743
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

polyphenols in three different matrices by healthy subjects. Clin Bio-
chem 2003;36:79–87.
141. Hendrich S. Bioavailability of isoflavones. J Chromatogr B Anal Tech-
nol Biomed Life Sci 2002;777:203–10.
142. Scheline RR. CRC Handbook of mammalian metabolism of plant com-
pounds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1991.
143. Griffiths LA, Smith GE. Metabolism of apigenin and related com-
pounds in the rat. Metabolite formation in vivo and by the intestinal
microflora in vitro. Biochem Genet 1972;128:901–11.
144. Gonthier MP, Cheynier V, Donovan JL, et al. Microbial aromatic acid
metabolites formed in the gut account for a major fraction of the poly-
phenols excreted in urine of rats fed red wine polyphenols. J Nutr
2003;133:461–7.
145. Rechner AR, Kuhnle G, Bremner P, Hubbard GP, Moore KP, Rice-
Evans CA. The metabolic fate of dietary polyphenols in humans. Free
Radic Biol Med 2002;33:220–35.
146. Kim D-H, Jung E-A, Sohng I-S, Han J-A, Kim T-H, Han MJ. Intestinal
bacterial metabolism of flavonoids and its relation to some biological
activities. Arch Pharm Res 1998;21:17–23.
147. Clifford MN, Copeland EL, Bloxsidge JP, Mitchell LA. Hippuric acid
as a major excretion product associated with black tea consumption.
Xenobiotica 2000;30:317–26.
148. Graefe EU, Veit M. Urinary metabolites of flavonoids and hydroxy-
cinnamic acids in humans after application of a crude extract from
Equisetum arvense. Phytomedicine 1999;6:239–46.
149. Setchell KD, Lawson AM, Borriello SP, et al. Lignan formation in
man—microbial involvement and possible roles in relation to cancer.
Lancet 1981;2:4–7.
150. Mousavi Y, Adlercreutz H. Enterolactone and estradiol inhibit each
other’s proliferative effect on MCF-7 breast cancer cells in culture. J
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1992;41:615–9.
151. Shutt DA, Cox RI. Steroid and phyto-oestrogen binding to sheep uter-
ine receptors in vitro. J Endocrinol 1972;52:299–310.
152. Setchell KD, Brown NM, Lydeking-Olsen E. The clinical importance
of the metabolite equol—a clue to the effectiveness of soy and its
isoflavones. J Nutr 2002;132:3577–84.
153. Lu LJW, Anderson KE. Sex and long-term soy diets affect the metab-
olism and excretion of soy isoflavones in humans. Am J Clin Nutr
1998;69(suppl):1500S–4S.
154. Morton MS, Arisaka O, Miyake N, Morgan LD, Evans BA. Phytoestro-
gen concentrations in serum from Japanese men and women over forty
years of age. J Nutr 2002;132:3168–71.
155. Karr SC, Lampe JW, Hutchins AM, Slavin JL. Urinary isoflavonoid
excretion in humans is dose dependent at low to moderate levels of
soy-protein consumption. Am J Clin Nutr 1997;66:46–51.
156. Bowey E, Adlercreutz H, Rowland I. Metabolism of isoflavones and
lignans by the gut microflora: a study in germ-free and human flora
associated rats. Food Chem Toxicol 2003;41:631–6.
157. Setchell KD, Zimmer-Nechemias L, Cai J, Heubi JE. Isoflavone con-
tent of infant formulas and the metabolic fate of these phytoestrogens
in early life. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68(suppl):1453S–61S.
158. Ueno T, Uchiyama S. Identification of the specific intestinal bacteria
capable of metabolising soy isoflavone to equol. Ann Nutr Metab
2001;45:114(abstr).
159. Lampe JW, Karr SC, Hutchins AM, Slavin JL. Urinary equol excretion
with a soy challenge: influence of habitual diet. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
1998;217:335–9.
160. Rowland IR, Wiseman H, Sanders TAB, Adlercreutz H, Bowey EA.
Interindividual variation in metabolism of soy isoflavones and lignans:
influence of habitual diet on equol production by the gut microflora.
Nutr Cancer 2000;36:27–32.
161. Ohta A, Uehara M, Sakai K, et al. A combination of dietary fructooli-
gosaccharides and isoflavone conjugates increases femoral bone min-
eral density and equol production in ovariectomized mice. J Nutr 2002;
132:2048–54.
162. Lu LJ, Lin SN, Grady JJ, Nagamani M, Anderson KE. Altered kinetics
and extent of urinary daidzein and genistein excretion in women during
chronic soya exposure. Nutr Cancer 1996;26:289–302.
163. Lampe JW, Skor HE, Li S, Wahala K, Howald WN, Chen C. Wheat
bran and soy protein feeding do not alter urinary excretion of the
isoflavan equol in premenopausal women. J Nutr 2001;131:740–4.
164. Lee MJ, Maliakal P, Chen L, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tea catechins
after ingestion of green tea and ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate by hu-
mans: formation of different metabolites and individual variability.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002;11:1025–32.
165. Meng X, Lee MJ, Li C, et al. Formation and identification of 4'-O-
methyl-()-epigallocatechin in humans. Drug Metab Dispos 2001;29:
789–93.
166. Piskula MK, Terao J. Accumulation of ()-epicatechin metabolites in
rat plasma after oral administration and distribution of conjugation
enzymes in rat tissues. J Nutr 1998;128:1172–8.
167. Tilgmann C, Ulmanen I. Purification methods of mammalian catechol-
O-methyltransferases. J Chromatogr B Biomed Appl 1996;684:147–
61.
168. Donovan JL, Crespy V, Manach C, et al. Catechin is metabolized by
both the small intestine and the liver in rats. J Nutr 2001;131:1753–7.
169. FalanyCN.Enzymologyofhumancytosolicsulfotransferases.FASEB
J 1997;11:206–16.
170. Sfakianos J, Coward L, Kirk M, Barnes S. Intestinal uptake and biliary
excretion of the isoflavone genistein in rats. J Nutr 1997;127:1260–8.
171. Spencer JP, Chowrimootoo G, Choudhury R, Debnam ES, Srai SK,
Rice-Evans C. The small intestine can both absorb and glucuronidate
luminal flavonoids. FEBS Lett 1999;458:224–30.
172. Crespy V, Morand C, Besson C, Manach C, Demigne C, Remesy C.
Comparisonoftheintestinalabsorptionofquercetin,phloretinandtheir
glucosides in rats. J Nutr 2001;131:2109–14.
173. Boersma MG, van der Woude H, Bogaards J, et al. Regioselectivity of
phase II metabolism of luteolin and quercetin by UDP-glucuronosyl
transferases. Chem Res Toxicol 2002;15:662–70.
174. Fisher MB, Paine MF, Strelevitz TJ, Wrighton SA. The role of hepatic
and extrahepatic UDP-glucuronosyltransferases in human drug metab-
olism. Drug Metab Rev 2001;33:273–97.
175. Doerge DR, Chang HC, Churchwell MI, Holder CL. Analysis of soy
isoflavone conjugation in vitro and in human blood using liquid chroma-
tography–mass spectrometry. Drug Metab Dispos 2000;28:298–307.
176. Day AJ, Bao YP, Morgan MRA, Williamson G. Conjugation position
of quercetin glucuronides and effect on biological activity. Free Radic
Biol Med 2000;29:1234–43.
177. Morand C, Crespy V, Manach C, Besson C, Demigne C, Remesy C.
Plasma metabolites of quercetin and their antioxidant properties. Am J
Physiol 1998;275:R212–9.
178. Crespy V, Morand C, Manach C, Besson C, Demigne C, Remesy C.
Part of quercetin absorbed in the small intestine is conjugated and
further secreted in the intestinal lumen. Am J Physiol 1999;277:
G120–6.
179. Andlauer W, Kolb J, Furst P. Absorption and metabolism of genistin in
the isolated rat small intestine. FEBS Lett 2000;475:127–30.
180. Walle UK, Galijatovic A, Walle T. Transport of the flavonoid chrysin
and its conjugated metabolites by the human intestinal cell line Caco-2.
Biochem Pharmacol 1999;58:431–8.
181. Ayrton A, Morgan P. Role of transport proteins in drug absorption,
distribution and excretion. Xenobiotica 2001;31:469–97.
182. Crespy V, Morand C, Besson C, et al. The splanchnic metabolism of
flavonoids highly differed according to the nature of the compound.
Am J Physiol 2003;284:G980–8.
183. O’Leary KA, Day AJ, Needs PW, Mellon FA, O’Brien NM, William-
son G. Metabolism of quercetin-7- and quercetin-3-glucuronides by an
in vitro hepatic model: the role of human beta-glucuronidase, sulfotrans-
ferase,catechol-O-methyltransferaseandmulti-resistantprotein2(MRP2)
in flavonoid metabolism. Biochem Pharmacol 2003;65:479–91.
184. Sallustio BC, Sabordo L, Evans AM, Nation RL. Hepatic disposition of
electrophilic acyl glucuronide conjugates. Curr Drug Metab 2000;1:
163–80.
185. VoreM.Regulationofdrugconjugateprocessingbyhepatocellulartrans-
port systems. In: Kauffman F, ed. Conjugation-deconjugation reactions in
drug metabolism and toxicity. Berlin: Springer, 1994:311–38.
186. Koster H, Halsema I, Scholtens E, Knippers M, Mulder GJ. Dose-
dependent shifts in the sulfation and glucuronidation of phenolic com-
pounds in the rat in vivo and in isolated hepatocytes. The role of saturation
of phenolsulfotransferase. Biochem Pharmacol 1981;30:2569–75.
187. Piskula MK. Soy isoflavone conjugation differs in fed and food-
deprived rats. J Nutr 2000;130:1766–71.
188. Day AJ, Mellon F, Barron D, Sarrazin G, Morgan MR, Williamson G.
Human metabolism of dietary flavonoids: identification of plasma me-
tabolites of quercetin. Free Radic Res 2001;35:941–52.
189. Manach C, Morand C, Gil-Izquierdo A, Bouteloup-Demange C,
Remesy C. Bioavailability in humans of the flavanones hesperidin and
744
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

narirutinaftertheingestionoftwodosesoforangejuice.EurJClinNutr
2003;57:235–42.
190. Baba S, Osakabe N, Yasuda A, et al. Bioavailability of ()-epicatechin
upon intake of chocolate and cocoa in human volunteers. Free Radic
Res 2000;33:635–41.
191. Shelnutt SR, Cimino CO, Wiggins PA, Ronis MJ, Badger TM. Phar-
macokinetics of the glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of genistein and
daidzein in men and women after consumption of a soy beverage. Am J
Clin Nutr 2002;76:588–94.
192. Zhang Y, Hendrich S, Murphy PA. Glucuronides are the main isofla-
vone metabolites in women. J Nutr 2003;133:399–404.
193. Boulton DW, Walle UK, Walle T. Extensive binding of the biofla-
vonoid quercetin to human plasma proteins. J Pharm Pharmacol 1998;
50:243–9.
194. Dangles O, Dufour C, Manach C, Morand C, Remesy C. Binding of
flavonoids to plasma proteins. Methods Enzymol 2001;335:319–33.
195. Dangles O, Dufour C, Bret S. Flavonol–serum albumin complexation.
Two-electron oxidation of flavonols and their complexes with serum
albumin. J Chem Soc [Perkin 1] 1999;2:737–44.
196. Adzet T, Camarasa J, Escubedo E, Merlos M. In vitro study of caffeic
acid–bovine serum albumin interaction. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmaco-
kinet 1988;13:11–4.
197. Horie T, Mizuma T, Kasai S, Awazu S. Conformational change in
plasma albumin due to interaction with isolated rat hepatocyte. Am J
Physiol 1988;254:G465–70.
198. Saija A, Scalese M, Lanza M, Marzullo D, Bonina F, Castelli F. Fla-
vonoids as antioxidant agents: importance of their interaction with
biomembranes. Free Radic Biol Med 1995;19:481–6.
199. Castelli F, Uccella N, Trombetta D, Saija A. Differences between
coumaric and cinnamic acids in membrane permeation as evidenced by
time-dependent calorimetry. J Agric Food Chem 1999;47:991–5.
200. Nakayama T, Ono K, Hashimoto K. Affinity of antioxidative polyphe-
nols for lipid bilayers evaluated with a liposome system. Biosci Bio-
technol Biochem 1998;62:1005–7.
201. Movileanu L, Neagoe I, Flonta ML. Interaction of the antioxidant
flavonoid quercetin with planar lipid bilayers. Int J Pharm 2000;205:
135–46.
202. Ollila F, Halling K, Vuorela P, Vuorela H, Slotte JP. Characterization
of flavonoid-biomembrane interactions. Arch Biochem Biophys 2002;
399:103–8.
203. van Acker SA, de Groot MJ, van den Berg DJ, et al. A quantum
chemical explanation of the antioxidant activity of flavonoids. Chem
Res Toxicol 1996;9:1305–12.
204. Verstraeten SV, Keen CL, Schmitz HH, Fraga CG, Oteiza PI. Flavan-
3-ols and procyanidins protect liposomes against lipid oxidation
and disruption of the bilayer structure. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34:
84–92.
205. van het Hof KH, Wiseman SA, Yang CS, Tijburg LB. Plasma and
lipoprotein levels of tea catechins following repeated tea consumption.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1999;220:203–9.
206. Gimeno E, Fito M, Lamuela-Raventos RM, et al. Effect of ingestion of
virgin olive oil on human low-density lipoprotein composition. Eur
J Clin Nutr 2002;56:114–20.
207. Vinson JA, Dabbagh YA, Serry MM, Jang JH. Plant flavonoids, espe-
cially tea flavonols, are powerful antioxidants using an in vitro oxida-
tion model for heart disease. J Agric Food Chem 1995;43:2800–2.
208. Hayek T, Fuhrman B, Vaya J, et al. Reduced progression of athero-
sclerosis in apolipoprotein E–deficient mice following consumption of
red wine, or its polyphenols quercetin or catechin, is associated with
reduced susceptibility of LDL to oxidation and aggregation. Arterio-
scler Thromb Vasc Biol 1997;17:2744–52.
209. Kaamanen M, Adlercreutz H, Jauhiainen M, Tikkanen MJ. Accumu-
lation of genistein and lipophilic genistein derivatives in lipoproteins
during incubation with human plasma in vitro. Biochim Biophys Acta
2003;1631:147–52.
210. Lee M-J, Wang Z-Y, Li H, et al. Analysis of plasma and urinary tea
polyphenols in human subjects. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1995;4:393–9.
211. Unno T, Kondo K, Itakura H, Takeo T. Analysis of ()-
epigallocatechin gallate in human serum obtained after ingesting green
tea. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1996;60:2066–8.
212. Rein D, Lotito S, Holt RR, Keen CL, Schmitz HH, Fraga CG. Epicat-
echin in human plasma: in vivo determination and effect of chocolate
consumption on plasma oxidation status. J Nutr 2000;130:2109S–14S.
213. Wang JF, Schramm DD, Holt RR, et al. A dose-response effect from
chocolate consumption on plasma epicatechin and oxidative damage. J
Nutr 2000;130:2115S–9S.
214. Erlund I, Meririnne E, Alfthan G, Aro A. Plasma kinetics and urinary
excretion of the flavanones naringenin and hesperetin in humans after
ingestion of orange juice and grapefruit juice. J Nutr 2001;131:235–41.
215. Miyazawa T, Nakagawa K, Kudo M, Muraishi K, Someya K. Direct
intestinal absorption of red fruit anthocyanins, cyanidin-3-glucoside
and cyanidin-3,5-diglucoside, into rats and humans. J Agric Food
Chem 1999;47:1083–91.
216. Matsumoto H, Inaba H, Kishi M, Tominaga S, Hirayama M, Tsuda T.
Orally administered delphinidin 3-rutinoside and cyanidin 3-rutinoside
are directly absorbed in rats and humans and appear in the blood as the
intact forms. J Agric Food Chem 2001;49:1546–51.
217. CaoG,MuccitelliHU,Sanchez-MorenoC,PriorRL.Anthocyaninsare
absorbedinglycatedformsinelderlywomen:apharmacokineticstudy.
Am J Clin Nutr 2001;73:920–6.
218. Nesbitt PD, Lam Y, Thompson LU. Human metabolism of mammalian
lignan precursors in raw and processed flaxseed. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;
69:549–55.
219. Xu X, Wang H-J, Murphy PA, Cook L, Hendrich S. Daidzein is a more
bioavailable soymilk isoflavone than is genistein in adult women. J
Nutr 1994;124:825–32.
220. King RA, Bursill DB. Plasma and urinary kinetics of the isoflavones
daidzein and genistein after a single soy meal in humans. Am J Clin
Nutr 1998;67:867–72.
221. Watanabe S, Yamaguchi M, Sobue T, et al. Pharmacokinetics of soy-
bean isoflavones in plasma, urine and feces of men after ingestion of
60 g baked soybean powder (kinako). J Nutr 1998;128:1710–5.
222. Cassidy A, Bingham S, Setchell KD. Biological effects of a diet of soy
protein rich in isoflavones on the menstrual cycle of premenopausal
women. Am J Clin Nutr 1994;60:333–40.
223. Setchell KDR, Zimmer-Nechemias L, Cai JN, Heubi JE. Exposure of
infants to phyto-oestrogens from soy-based infant formula. Lancet
1997;350:23–7.
224. Ueno I, Nakano N, Hirono I. Metabolic fate of [14C]quercetin in the
ACI rat. Jpn J Exp Med 1983;53:41–50.
225. Suganuma M, Okabe S, Oniyama M, Tada Y, Ito H, Fujiki H. Wide
distribution of [3H]()-epigallocatechin gallate, a cancer preventive
tea polyphenol, in mouse tissue. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:1771–6.
226. Mullen W, Graf BA, Caldwell ST, et al. Determination of flavonol me-
tabolites in plasma and tissues of rats by HPLC-radiocounting and tandem
mass spectrometry following oral ingestion of [2-(14)C]quercetin-4'-
glucoside. J Agric Food Chem 2002;50:6902–9.
227. Vitrac X, Desmouliere A, Brouillaud B, et al. Distribution of [14C]-
trans-resveratrol, a cancer chemopreventive polyphenol, in mouse tis-
sues after oral administration. Life Sci 2003;72:2219–33.
228. DatlaKP,ChristidouM,WidmerWW,RoopraiHK,DexterDT.Tissue
distributionandneuroprotectiveeffectsofcitrusflavonoidtangeretinin
a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Neuroreport 2001;12:3871–5.
229. Abd El Mohsen MM, Kuhnle G, Rechner AR, et al. Uptake and me-
tabolism of epicatechin and its access to the brain after oral ingestion.
Free Radic Biol Med 2002;33:1693–702.
230. Youdim KA, Martin A, Joseph JA. Incorporation of the elderberry
anthocyanins by endothelial cells increases protection against oxida-
tive stress. Free Radic Biol Med 2000;29:51–60.
231. Chang HC, Churchwell MI, Delclos KB, Newbold RR, Doerge DR.
Mass spectrometric determination of Genistein tissue distribution in
diet-exposed Sprague-Dawley rats. J Nutr 2000;130:1963–70.
232. KimSB,LeeMJ,HongJI,etal.Plasmaandtissuelevelsofteacatechins
in rats and mice during chronic consumption of green tea polyphenols.
Nutr Cancer 2000;37:41–8.
233. Coldham NG, Sauer MJ. Pharmacokinetics of [(14)C]Genistein in the
rat: gender-related differences, potential mechanisms of biological ac-
tion,andimplicationsforhumanhealth.ToxicolApplPharmacol2000;
164:206–15.
234. Schramm D, Collins H, German B. Flavonoid transport by mammalian
endothelial cells. J Nutr Biochem 1999;10:193–7.
235. Kwon SM, Kim SI, Chun DC, et al. Development of rat prostatitis
model by oral administration of isoflavone and its characteristics. Yon-
sei Med J 2001;42:395–404.
236. Youdim KA, Dobbie MS, Kuhnle G, Proteggente AR, Abbott NJ,
Rice-Evans C. Interaction between flavonoids and the blood-brain bar-
rier: in vitro studies. J Neurochem 2003;85:180–92.
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
745
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

237. Fritz WA, Coward L, Wang J, Lamartiniere CA. Dietary genistein:
perinatal mammary cancer prevention, bioavailability and toxicity test-
ing in the rat. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:2151–8.
238. Wang J, Eltoum IE, Lamartiniere CA. Dietary genistein suppresses
chemically induced prostate cancer in Lobund-Wistar rats. Cancer Lett
2002;186:11–8.
239. Hong SJ, Kim SI, Kwon SM, Lee JR, Chung BC. Comparative study of
concentration of isoflavones and lignans in plasma and prostatic tissues
of normal control and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Yonsei Med J
2002;43:236–41.
240. Maubach J, Bracke ME, Heyerick A, et al. Quantitation of soy-derived
phytoestrogens in human breast tissue and biological fluids by high-
performance liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr B Anal Technol
Biomed Life Sci 2003;784:137–44.
241. Kohri
T,
Nanjo
F,
Suzuki
M,
et
al.
Synthesis
of
()-[4-
3H]epigallocatechin gallate and its metabolic fate in rats after intrave-
nous administration. J Agric Food Chem 2001;49:1042–8.
242. Fuhr U, Kummert AL. The fate of naringin in humans: a key to grape-
fruit juice–drug interactions? Clin Pharmacol Ther 1995;58:365–73.
243. Lee YS, Reidenberg MM. A method for measuring naringenin in bio-
logical fluids and its disposition from grapefruit juice by man. Phar-
macology 1998;56:314–7.
244. Setchell KD, Faughnan MS, Avades T, et al. Comparing the pharma-
cokinetics of daidzein and genistein with the use of 13C-labeled tracers
in premenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;77:411–9.
245. Netzel M, Strass G, Janssen M, Bitsch I, Bitsch R. Bioactive antho-
cyanins detected in human urine after ingestion of blackcurrant juice. J
Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 2001;20:89–95.
246. Bub A, Watzl B, Heeb D, Rechkemmer G, Briviba K. Malvidin-3-
glucoside bioavailability in humans after ingestion of red wine, deal-
coholized red wine and red grape juice. Eur J Nutr 2001;40:113–20.
247. Lapidot T, Harel S, Granit R, Kanner J. Bioavailability of red wine
anthocyanins as detected in human urine. J Agric Food Chem 1998;
46:4297–302.
248. Felgines C, Talavera S, Gonthier MP, et al. Strawberry anthocyanins
are recovered in urine as glucuro- and sulfoconjugates in humans. J
Nutr 2003;133:1296–301.
249. Yang B, Arai K, Kusu F. Determination of catechins in human urine
subsequent to tea ingestion by high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy with electrochemical detection. Anal Biochem 2000;283:77–82.
250. Jacobson EA, Newmark H, Baptista J, Bruce WR. A preliminary in-
vestigation of the metabolism of dietary phenolics in humans. Nutr Rep
Int 1983;28:1409–17.
251. Bell JRC, Donovan JL, Wong R, et al. ()-Catechin in human plasma
after ingestion of a single serving of reconstituted red wine. Am J Clin
Nutr 2000;71:103–8.
252. Richelle M, Tavazzi I, Enslen M, Offord EA. Plasma kinetics in man of
epicatechin from black chocolate. Eur J Clin Nutr 1999;53:22–6.
253. Yang CS, Chen L, Lee MJ, Balentine D, Kuo MC, Schantz SP. Blood
and urine levels of tea catechins after ingestion of different amounts of
green tea by human volunteers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1998;7:351–4.
254. Okuda T, Mori K, Hatano T. Relationship of the structures of tannins to
the binding activities with hemoglobin and methylene blue. Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 1985;33:1424–33.
255. Shelnutt SR, Cimino CO, Wiggins PA, Badger TM. Urinary pharma-
cokinetics of the glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of genistein and
daidzein. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2000;9:413–9.
256. Moon JH, Nakata R, Oshima S, Inakuma T, Terao J. Accumulation of
quercetin conjugates in blood plasma after the short-term ingestion of
onion by women. Am J Physiol 2000;279:R461–7.
257. Warden BA, Smith LS, Beecher GR, Balentine DA, Clevidence BA.
Catechins are bioavailable in men and women drinking black tea
throughout the day. J Nutr 2001;131:1731–7.
258. Moon J, Tsushida T, Nakahara K, Terao J. Identification of quercetin
3-O-beta-D-glucuronide as an antioxidative metabolite in rat plasma
after oral administration of quercetin. Free Radic Biol Med 2001;30:
1274–85.
259. Cren-Olive CC, Teissier E, Duriez P, Rolando C. Effect of catechin
O-methylated metabolites and analogues on human LDL oxidation.
Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34:850–5.
260. Maxwell S, Cruickshank A, Thorpe G. Red wine and antioxidant ac-
tivity in serum. Lancet 1994;344:193–4.
261. Whitehead TP, Robinson D, Allaway S, Syms J, Hale A. Effect of red
wine ingestion on the antioxidant capacity of serum. Clin Chem 1995;
41:32–5.
262. Cao G, Russell RM, Lischner N, Prior RL. Serum antioxidant capacity
is increased by consumption of strawberries, spinach, red wine or
vitamin C in elderly women. J Nutr 1998;128:2383–90.
263. Young JF, Nielsen SE, Haraldsdottir J, et al. Effect of fruit juice intake
on urinary quercetin excretion and biomarkers of antioxidative status.
Am J Clin Nutr 1999;69:87–94.
264. Serafini M, Laranjinha JAN, Almeida LM, Maiani G. Inhibition of
human LDL lipid peroxidation by phenol-rich beverages and their
impact on plasma total antioxidant capacity in humans. J Nutr Biochem
2000;11:585–90.
265. Kauffman FC, Zaleski J, Thurman RG, Kwei GY. Biologically active
conjugates of drugs and toxic chemicals. In: Kauffman FC, ed.
Conjugation-deconjugation reactions in drug metabolism and toxicity.
Berlin: Springer, 1994:341–66.
266. Koga T, Meydani M. Effect of plasma metabolites of ()-catechin and
quercetin on monocyte adhesion to human aortic endothelial cells.
Am J Clin Nutr 2001;73:941–8.
267. Yoshizumi M, Tsuchiya K, Suzaki Y, et al. Quercetin glucuronide
preventsVSMChypertrophybyangiotensinIIviatheinhibitionofJNK
and AP-1 signaling pathway. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;
293:1458–65.
268. Zhang Y, Song TT, Cunnick JE, Murphy PA, Hendrich S. Daidzein and
genistein glucuronides in vitro are weakly estrogenic and activate hu-
man natural killer cells at nutritionally relevant concentrations. J Nutr
1999;129:399–405.
269. Spencer JP, Schroeter H, Crossthwaithe AJ, Kuhnle G, Williams RJ,
Rice-Evans
C.
Contrasting
influences
of
glucuronidation
and
O-methylationofepicatechinonhydrogenperoxide–inducedcelldeath
in neurons and fibroblasts. Free Radic Biol Med 2001;31:1139–46.
270. Pasqualini JR, Gelly C, Nguyen BL, Vella C. Importance of estrogen
sulfates in breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem 1989;34:155–63.
271. Zhu BT, Evaristus EN, Antoniak SK, Sarabia SF, Ricci MJ, Liehr JG.
Metabolic deglucuronidation and demethylation of estrogen conju-
gates as a source of parent estrogens and catecholestrogen metabolites
in Syrian hamster kidney, a target organ of estrogen-induced tumori-
genesis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1996;136:186–93.
272. O’LearyKA,DayAJ,NeedsPW,SlyWS,O’BrienNM,WilliamsonG.
Flavonoid
glucuronides
are
substrates
for
human
liver
beta-
glucuronidase. FEBS Lett 2001;503:103–6.
273. Vore M, Hoffman T. Carrier-mediated electrogenic transport of
estradiol-17 beta-glucuronide in rat liver BMV. Am J Physiol 1994;
267:G546–51.
274. Battaglia E, Gollan J. A unique multifunctional transporter translocates
estradiol-17beta-glucuronide in rat liver microsomal vesicles. J Biol
Chem 2001;276:23492–8.
275. Sperker B, Backman JT, Kroemer HK. The role of beta-glucuronidase
in drug disposition and drug targeting in humans. Clin Pharmacokinet-
ics 1997;33:18–31.
276. Sperker B, Werner U, Murdter TE, et al. Expression and function of
beta-glucuronidase in pancreatic cancer: potential role in drug target-
ing. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2000;362:110–5.
277. Shimoi K, Saka N, Nozawa R, et al. Deglucuronidation of a flavonoid,
luteolin monoglucuronide, during inflammation. Drug Metab Dispos
2001;29:1521–4.
278. Zhu BT. Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT)–mediated methyl-
ationmetabolismofendogenousbioactivecatecholsandmodulationby
endobiotics and xenobiotics: importance in pathophysiology and
pathogenesis. Curr Drug Metab 2002;3:321–49.
279. Eaton EA, Walle UK, Lewis AJ, Hudson T, Wilson AA, Walle T.
Flavonoids, potent inhibitors of the human P-form phenolsulfotrans-
ferase. Potential role in drug metabolism and chemoprevention. Drug
Metab Dispos 1996;24:232–7.
280. Wong CK, Keung WM. Daidzein sulfoconjugates are potent inhibitors
of sterol sulfatase (EC 3.1.6.2). Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;
233:579–83.
281. Otake Y, Nolan AL, Walle UK, Walle T. Quercetin and resveratrol
potently reduce estrogen sulfotransferase activity in normal human mam-
mary epithelial cells. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2000;73:265–70.
282. MarchettiF,DeSantiC,VietriM,etal.Differentialinhibitionofhuman
liver and duodenum sulphotransferase activities by quercetin, a fla-
vonoid present in vegetables, fruit and wine. Xenobiotica 2001;31:
841–7.
746
MANACH ET AL
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 

283. Coughtrie MW, Sharp S, Maxwell K, Innes NP. Biology and function
of the reversible sulfation pathway catalysed by human sulfotrans-
ferases and sulfatases. Chem Biol Interact 1998;109:3–27.
284. Canivenc-Lavier MC, Vernevaut MF, Totis M, Siess MH, Magdalou J,
Suschetet M. Comparative effects of flavonoids and model inducers
on drug-metabolizing enzymes in rat liver. Toxicology 1996;114:
19–27.
285. Galijatovic A, Walle UK, Walle T. Induction of UDP-glucuronosyl-
transferase by the flavonoids chrysin and quercetin in Caco-2 cells.
Pharm Res 2000;17:21–6.
286. Zhu BT, Taneja N, Loder DP, Balentine DA, Conney AH. Effects of tea
polyphenols and flavonoids on liver microsomal glucuronidation of
estradiol and estrone. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1998;64:207–15.
287. Fricker G, Miller DS. Relevance of multidrug resistance proteins for
intestinal drug absorption in vitro and in vivo. Pharmacol Toxicol
2002;90:5–13.
288. Evans AM. Influence of dietary components on the gastrointestinal
metabolism and transport of drugs. Ther Drug Monit 2000;22:131–6.
289. Fuhr U. Drug interactions with grapefruit juice. Extent, probable mech-
anism and clinical relevance. Drug Saf 1998;18:251–72.
POLYPHENOLS: FOOD SOURCES AND BIOAVAILABILITY
747
 by guest on August 20, 2016
ajcn.nutrition.org
Downloaded from 
