Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 17 (2009) 661–680
661
DOI 10.3233/JAD-2009-1087
IOS Press
Caffeine Reverses Cognitive Impairment and
Decreases Brain Amyloid-β Levels in Aged
Alzheimer’s Disease Mice
Gary W. Arendasha,b,∗, Takashi Moric, Chuanhai Caoa,b,d, Malgorzata Mamcarza,b,
Melissa Runfeldta,b, Alexander Dicksona,b, Kavon Rezai-Zadehe, Jun Tane, Bruce A. Citronf,g,
Xiaoyang Lina,d, Valentina Echeverriaf,g and Huntington Pottera,b,d,h
aFlorida Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
bDepartment of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
cDepartments of Medical Science and Pathology, Saitama Medical Center and Saitama Medical University,
Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan
dThe Byrd Alzheimer’s Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
eDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
fDepartment of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
gBay Pines VA Healthcare System, Bay Pines, FL, USA
hSuncoast Gerontology and Alzheimer’s Center, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
Accepted 20 January 2009
Abstract. We have recently shown that Alzheimer’s disease (AD) transgenic mice given a moderate level of caffeine intake (the
human equivalent of 5 cups of coffee per day) are protected from development of otherwise certain cognitive impairment and have
decreased hippocampal amyloid-β (Aβ) levels due to suppression of both β-secretase (BACE1) and presenilin 1 (PS1)/γ-secretase
expression. To determine if caffeine intake can have beneﬁcial effects in “aged” APPsw mice already demonstrating cognitive
impairment, we administered caffeine in the drinking water of 18–19 month old APPsw mice that were impaired in working
memory. At 4–5 weeks into caffeine treatment, those impaired transgenic mice given caffeine (Tg/Caff) exhibited vastly superior
working memory compared to the continuing impairment of control transgenic mice. In addition, Tg/Caff mice had substantially
reduced Aβ deposition in hippocampus (↓40%) and entorhinal cortex (↓46%), as well as correlated decreases in brain soluble Aβ
levels. Mechanistically, evidence is provided that caffeine suppression of BACE1 involves the cRaf-1/NFκB pathway. We also
determined that caffeine concentrations within human physiological range effectively reduce active and total glycogen synthase
kinase 3 levels in SweAPP N2a cells. Even with pre-existing and substantial Aβ burden, aged APPsw mice exhibited memory
restoration and reversal of AD pathology, suggesting a treatment potential of caffeine in cases of established AD.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s transgenic mice, amyloid-β, caffeine, cognitive impairment, memory, treatment
∗Address for correspondence: Gary W. Arendash, Ph.D., Depart-
ment of Cell Biology, Microbiology, & Molecular Biology, BSF218,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA. Tel.:
+1 813 974 1584; Fax: +1 813 974 1614; E-mail: arendash@
cas.usf.edu.
INTRODUCTION
Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychoactive
substance known to man, being primarily consumed
in coffee, tea, and soft drinks.
As a brain stimu-
lant, its primary actions are to increase cerebral energy
metabolism, cortical activity, and extracellular levels of
acetylcholine, collectively resulting in enhanced alert-
ISSN 1387-2877/09/$17.00 2009 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

662
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
ness [1]. In addition to these well-documented stim-
ulatory effects of caffeine, epidemiology/longitudinal
studies in humans have suggested that caffeine is pro-
tective against a variety of diseases associated with ag-
ing including Parkinson’sdisease, Type 2 Diabetes, and
liver disease [2–5]. More recently, several longitudinal
studies have reported that daily caffeine intake, equiv-
alent to 3 or more cups of coffee, reduces cognitive
decline in “non-demented” elderly men and women [6,
7]. Of direct relation to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), an-
other recent study involving a 21 year follow-up period
found that midlife intake of 3–5 cups of coffee substan-
tially reduced the risk of AD in later life [8]. Moreover,
AD patients were found to have consumed markedly
less caffeine during the 20 years preceding AD diag-
nosis when compared to age-matched individuals with-
out AD [9]. These cognition-based human studies sug-
gest that long-term caffeine intake may protect against
aged-associated memory impairment and AD [10].
Although human epidemiologic/longitudinalstudies
are insightful, they cannot deﬁnitively isolate caffeine
intake from other lifestyle choices that potentiallyaffect
cognition. Therefore, we recently performed a high-
ly controlled study in AD transgenic (APPsw) mice,
which develop high levels of brain amyloid-β (Aβ) and
widespread cognitive impairment as they age [11,12].
Long-term caffeine administration that began in young
adulthood protected these APPsw mice against other-
wise certain cognitive impairment, while also limiting
their brain Aβ levels [13]. We further found that this
long-term caffeine administration suppressed brain Aβ
production by reducing expression of both Presenilin
1 (PS1) and β-secretase (BACE1). Because the bene-
ﬁcial effects were achieved by a moderate daily level
of caffeine in drinking water (the human equivalent of
5 cups of coffee or 500 mg caffeine per day), we have
suggested that a modest amount of daily caffeine may
delay or reduce the risk of AD [13].
In the present study, we ﬁrst aimed to determine if
caffeine intake can have beneﬁcial effects in “aged”
APPsw mice already exhibiting cognitive impairment.
Therefore,at several months into caffeine treatment,we
re-evaluatedcognitive performancein aged APPsw and
determined the impact on both Aβ levels/Aβ deposi-
tion and synaptophysin immunostaining in cognitively
important brain areas.
Second, we wished to developgreater insight into the
mechanism(s) of the ability of caffeine to reduce Aβ
and thus explored the potential involvement of the Raf-
1 inﬂammatory pathway and glycogen synthase kinase
3 (GSK-3) in caffeine’s mechanism of action in APPsw
mice. Raf-1 is hyperactivated in AD brains [14,15],
evidently due to an Aβ-induced decrease in the activity
of proteins (e.g., Ras, PKA) that regulate Raf-1 activ-
ity. GSK-3 is a constitutively active serine/threonine
kinase that is highly expressed in the central nervous
system (CNS) [16–18]. Dysregulation of GSK-3 is an
essential component of AD pathogenesis, playing an
integral role in PS1/γ-secretase activity, spatial learn-
ing deﬁcits, Aβ-induced toxicity, and tau phosphoryla-
tion [19–21].
Third, we administered caffeinethroughoutadult life
to non-transgenic (NT) mice,with cognitive assessment
in older age to determine if: 1) life-long caffeine intake
can provide cognitive beneﬁts to NT (normal) mice
and consequently, 2) generalized, non-amyloidogenic
mechanisms of caffeine action (such as increased cere-
bral blood ﬂow or enhanced brain glucose utilization)
could be important for its therapeutic effects in APPsw
mice.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Animals
A total of 55 mice were included in these studies.
Each mouse had a mixed background of 56.25% C57,
12.5% B6, 18.75% SJL, and 12.5% Swiss-Webster.
All mice were derived from a cross between heterozy-
gous mice carrying the mutant APPK670N, M671L
gene (APPsw) with heterozygous PS1 (Tg line 6.2)
mice to obtain F4 and F5 generation mice consisting
of APP/PS1, APPsw, PS1, and NT genotypes. After
weaning and genotyping, only APPsw and NT mice
were selected for behavioral testing and/or caffeine ad-
ministration. All mice were maintained on a 12 h dark
and 12 h light cycle with ad libitum access to rodent
chow and water or caffeinated water. All animal proce-
dures were performed in AAALAC-certiﬁed facilities
under protocols approved by Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committees at the University of South Florida.
General protocol
Three separate in vivo studies were performed as
follows:
Study 1: At 18–19 months of age, APPsw and NT
controls were pre-tested in the radial arm water maze
(RAWM) task, wherein APPsw mice were shown to
be impaired in working memory. Impaired transgenic
(Tg) mice were divided into two groups, equally bal-

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
663
anced by behavioral performance, with half of Tg mice
starting on caffeine administeredin their drinkingwater
(0.3 mg/ml; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and the other half
remaining on standard tap water. At 4–5 weeks into
caffeine treatment, Tg caffeine-treated (Tg/Caff; n =
6), as well as Tg control (Tg; n = 7), and NT control
(NT; n = 8) mice were re-tested in the RAWM, as well
as in several other behavioral tasks. All animals were
euthanatized immediately following completion of be-
havioral testing at 20–21 months of age. Their brains
were processed for determination of total Aβ deposi-
tion, soluble Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42, and synaptophysin
immunochemistry.
Study 2: Beginning at 9 months of age, APPsw mice
(n = 6) were gavaged with caffeine (1.5 mg/200 µl)
twice daily for two weeks. Gavage administration of
caffeine was done in this study because: 1) the treat-
ment period was relatively short-term compared to that
of Studies 1 and 3, and 2) gavage treatment is more pre-
cise in providingexactly the amount of caffeine desired
compared to ad libitum administration of caffeine in
drinking water. Control APPsw mice (n = 5) and NT
mice (n = 4) of the same age received gavage with wa-
ter vehicle instead. All mice were sacriﬁced immedi-
ately following the treatment period,their hippocampus
dissected out and stored at −80◦C until neurochemical
assay of pcRaf-1 and PKA activity analyses.
Study 3: In a “behavior-only” study, NT (normal)
mice began receiving caffeine in their drinking water
(0.3 mg/ml) at 51/2 months of age (NT/Caff; n = 8)
or were continued on standard water (NT; n = 11).
Between 15–16 months of age, and at 10 months into
caffeine treatment, all animals were tested in our com-
prehensive 6-week behavioral battery that included ﬁve
cognitive-based tasks.
Caffeine treatment
For Studies 1 and 3, caffeine was administered in
the drinking water (0.3 mg/ml) of Tg or NT mice. On
average, mice drink 5 ml per day, yielding a daily dose
of 1.5 mg caffeine to each mouse. According to our
prior study’s calculations accommodating for size and
metabolic rate differences [13], this daily dose in a
mouse is equivalent to approximately 500 mg (5 cups
of coffee) daily caffeine intake by a human. The caf-
feinated water was changed two times a week to en-
sure caffeine remained fully dissolved at the appropri-
ate concentration. Control APPsw and NT mice were
given ad libitum access to untreated tap water that was
also changed twice weekly to ensure freshness. Caf-
feine treatment was continued throughout behavioral
testing and until euthanasia. All groups consisted of
approximate equal numbers of male and female mice.
Behavioral testing
In Study 1, aged 18–19 month mice were pre-
treatment tested in the RAWM task, and then behav-
iorally tested again at 4–5 weeks into treatment in
the following tasks: open ﬁeld activity, balance beam,
string agility, Y-maze, elevated plus maze, RAWM, and
platform recognition. In Study 3, NT mice were test-
ed in our full behavioral battery beginning at 15–16
months of age (e.g., at 10 months into treatment). Al-
though detailed protocols for all behavioral tasks have
been described previously [22–24], a brief description
of each task is provided below:
Open Field Activity (Sensorimotor-based task; 1
day). As a test of activity and exploratory behavior,
each animal was placed in an open black box painted
with perpendicular lines demarcating 16 squares. The
total number of line crossings over a single 5-minute
trial was recorded through visual observation.
Balance Beam (Sensorimotor-basedtask; 1 day). As
a test of vestibular and general motor function, each
animal was placed at the center of a suspended beam
and released.
The average balance time from three
successive trials was recorded. The surface below the
beam had a thick sponge cushion to protect mice that
fall off the beam.
String Agility (Sensorimotor-based task; 1 day). As
a test of agility and grip capacity, animals were permit-
ted to grasp a suspended string only by their forepaws
and then released. During a single 60-secondtrial, each
animal was assessed using a 0–5 rating system (0 =
animal unable to remain on string; 1 = hangs by two
forepaws; 2 = attempts to climb onto string; 3 = two
forepaws and one or both hind paws around string; 4
= four paws and tail around string, with lateral move-
ment; 5 = escape to one of the two poles suspending
the string).
Y-maze spontaneous alternation (Sensorimotor- and
Cognitive-based task; 1 day).
To measure general
activity and basic hippocampal-dependent mnemonic
function, mice were allowed to explore a black Y-maze
with 3 arms.
Each arm measures 21 × 4 cm with
40 cm high walls. Mice were placed in the center of the
maze facing the center area and allowed to explore for
5 minutes, with the number and sequence of arm choic-
es being recorded. General activity was measured as
the total number of arm entries, while basic mnemonic

664
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
function was determined as a percent spontaneous al-
ternation (the ratio of arm choices differing from the
previous two choices divided by the total number of
entries).
Elevated Plus Maze (Anxiety-based task; 1 day). To
measure anxiety/emotionality, mice were placed in the
center of an elevated plus maze 82 cm above the ﬂoor.
The maze consists of two opposite “open” and two op-
posite “closed” arms, each 30 × 5 cm; 15 cm high
black aluminum walls surround the closed arms. The
mice were placed in the 5 × 5 cm maze center, facing
a closed arm, and were allowed to explore for 5 min-
utes. The total number of closed arm entries, open arm
entries and total time (seconds) spent in the open arms
was recorded. We have found that time spend in open
arms is the purest measure of anxiety in this task [22].
Morris Water Maze (Cognitive-based task measur-
ing spatial learning and reference memory; 15 days).
The ﬂoor of a 100 cm circular pool was divided into
four quadrants, with a 9 cm platform submerged in the
goal quadrant. Surrounding the pool were a variety of
3-D and 2-D visual cues. Fourteen consecutive days
of acquisition were performed, with each of four trials
per day beginning with the animal being placed into
each of the four quadrants to initiate a 60-second tri-
al. Thus, a single training session consisted of four
successive trials, with a 30 second stay period (e.g.,
the animal is allowed to remain on the platform for 30
seconds after ﬁnding it or being guided to it at the end
of the trial). Average latency to ﬁnd the submerged
platform was obtained through visual observation. On
the day following acquisition testing, memory reten-
tion was evaluated in a single 60-second probe trial in
which the submerged platform was removed and the
animal released from the quadrant opposite the former
platform-containing quadrant. Percent of time spent in
each quadrant, number of annulus crossings, and swim
speed were all determined from video tracking records.
Circular Platform (Cognitive-based task measuring
spatial reference learning/memory; 8 days). A walled
69 cm circular platform, with 16 equidistantly spaced
holes along its periphery, was encircled by a black cur-
tain. Visual cues, located on the black curtain and plat-
form walls can be used by the animal to ﬁnd the one
hole through which it can escape the platform surface
to avoid the aversive stimuli of bright lights and fan
wind. During a single 5-minute maximum daily trial,
the total number of errors (head pokes into non-escape
holes) and latency to ﬁnd the escape hole were record-
ed. Although the escape hole remained constant for
any given animal over the 8 days of testing, it was re-
located after each animal’s trial to control for olfactory
cues. Also, to control for olfactory cues, the maze was
cleaned with a dilute vinegar solution following each
animal’s trial.
Platform Recognition (Cognitive-based task measur-
ing identiﬁcation and recognition; 4 days). The plat-
form recognition task measures the ability to search for
and identify/recognize a variably placed elevated plat-
form. It was run after the Morris Maze task (Study
2), or immediately following the RAWM task (Study
1) and in the same pool as these two tasks. Thus, the
platform recognitiontask requires animals to ignore the
spatial cues present around the pool and switch from
a spatial to an identiﬁcation/recognition strategy – it is
not a task of visual acuity alone in our paradigm, with
cognitive-based performance directly linked to levels
of brain Aβ [25]. Mice were given four successive
trials per day over a 4-day period. Latencies to ﬁnd an
elevated platform (9 cm diameter), bearing a prominent
cone-shaped styrofoam ensign on a wire pole, were de-
termined. For each trial (60 second maximum), ani-
mals were placed into the pool at the same location and
the platform was moved to a different one of four possi-
ble locations. For statistical analysis, escape latencies
for all four daily trials were averaged.
Radial arm water maze (RAWM) (Cognitively-based
task measuring working memory). For the radial arm
water maze task of spatial working memory, an alu-
minum insert was placed into a 100 cm circular pool to
create 6 radially distributed swim arms emanating from
a central circular swim area. An assortment of 2-D
and 3-D visual cues surrounded the pool. For Study
1 involving aged Tg mice, the number of errors prior
to locating which one of the 6 swim arms contained a
submerged escape platform (9 cm diameter) was deter-
mined for 5 trials/day over 6 days of pre-treatment test-
ing and 9 days of post-treatment testing; 3-day blocks
were used to facilitate statistical analysis. For Study 3
(involving NT mice), 6 days of testing were evaluated
over two 3-day blocks. There was a 30-min time delay
between the 4th trial (T4; ﬁnal acquisition trial) and
5th trial (T5; memory retention trial). The platform
location was changed daily to a different arm, with dif-
ferent start arms for each of the 5 trials semi-randomly
selected from the remaining 5 swim arms. During each
trial (60 second maximum), the mouse was returned to
that trial’s start arm upon swimming into an incorrect
arm and the number of seconds required to locate the
submergedplatform was recorded. If the mouse did not
ﬁnd the platform within a 60-second trial, it was guided
to the platform for the 30-second stay. The numbers

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
665
of errors during trials 4 and 5 are both considered in-
dices of working memory and are temporally similar to
the standard registration/recall testing of speciﬁc items
used clinically in evaluating AD patients. Analysis of
the number of seconds taken per arm choice (an index
of swim speed) over all days of post-treatment testing
revealed no differences in swim speed between groups
in both Studies 1 and 2.
Brain tissue preparation
Following completion of behavioral testing in Study
1, 20–21 month-old mice were deeplyanesthetizedwith
sodium pentobarbital and transcardially perfused with
100 ml of 0.9% saline. Postmortem brains were im-
mediately removed and bisected sagitally.
The hip-
pocampus and cerebral cortex were dissected from the
right hemisphereand processed for soluble Aβ1−40 and
Aβ1−42 determinations by ELISA. The left hemisphere
was placed in 4% paraformaldehydein 0.1M phosphate
buffer(pH 7.4) overnight,wherein tissues remainedun-
til routine parafﬁn embedding for immunohistochemi-
cal analyses.
Immunohistochemistry and image analysis
At the level of the hippocampus (bregma −2.92 mm
to −3.64 mm), ﬁve 5 µm sections (150 µm apart) were
made from each mouse brainusing a slidingmicrotome.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed follow-
ing the manufacturer’sprotocolusinga Vectastain ABC
Elite kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) cou-
pled with the diaminobenzidine reaction, except that
the biothinylated secondary antibody step was omitted
for Aβ immunohistochemical staining. The following
primary antibodies were used for immunohistochemi-
cal staining: a biothinylatedhumanAβ monoclonalan-
tibody (clone 4G8; 1:200, Covance Research Products,
Emeryville, CA) and rabbit synaptophysin polyclon-
al antibody (undiluted, DAKO, Carpinteria, CA). For
Aβ immunohistochemicalstaining, brain sections were
treated with 70% formic acid prior to the pre-blocking
step. Phosphate-buffered saline (0.1 mM, pH 7.4) or
normal rabbit serum (isotype control) was used instead
of primary antibody or ABC reagent as a negative con-
trol.
Quantitative image analysis was done based on pre-
vious methods with modiﬁcations [26,27].
Images
were acquired using an Olympus BX60 microscope
with an attached digital camera system (DP-70, Olym-
pus, Tokyo, Japan), and the digital image was rout-
ed into a Windows PC for quantitative analysis using
SimplePCI software (Compix Inc., Imaging Systems,
Cranberry Township,PA). Images of ﬁve 5-µm sections
(150 µm apart) through both anatomic regions of inter-
est (hippocampus and entorhinal cortex) were captured
from each animal, and a threshold optical density was
obtained that discriminated staining from background.
Each region of interest was manuallyeditedto eliminate
artifacts. For Aβ burden analysis, data are reported as
percentage of immunolabeled area captured (positive
pixels) relative to the full area captured (total pixels).
To evaluate synaptophysin immunoreactivity, after the
mode of all images was converted to gray scale, the av-
erage intensity of positive signals from each image was
quantiﬁed in the CA1 and CA3 regions of hippocampus
as a relative number from zero (white) to 255 (black).
Each analysis was done by a single examiner blinded
to sample identities.
Aβ ELISA
Hippocampal and cortical levels of human soluble
Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 were measured by ELISA. Brieﬂy,
30 mg brain samples were homogenized in 400 µl RI-
PA buffer (100 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5%
DOC, 1% NP-40, 0.2% SDS, and 1 tablet proteinase
inhibitor per 100 ml (S8820, Sigma, St. Louis, MO),
and sonicated for 20 seconds on ice. Samples were
then centrifuged for 30 min at 27,000 g at 4 ◦C, and
supernatants were transferred into new screw cap tube.
The supernatants obtained from this protocol were then
stored at −80◦C for determination of soluble Aβ levels
using ELISA kits (KHB3482 for 40, KHB3442 for 42,
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Standard and samples were
mixed with detection antibody and loaded on the anti-
body pre-coated plate as the designated wells. HRP-
conjugated antibody was added after wash, and sub-
strates were added for colorimetric reaction, and then
stopped with sulfuric acid. Optical density was ob-
tained and concentrations were calculated according a
standard curve.
Analysis of pcRaf-1 and Protein Kinase A (PKA)
For hippocampal tissue from Study 2, equal amounts
of protein were separated by sodium dodecyl sulphate–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
transferredto nitrocellulosemembranes(BA83 0.2 µm;
Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA). The membranes were
blocked in buffered saline with 0.05% Tween 20 (PB-
ST) containing 10% dry milk. Membranes were incu-

666
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
bated with primary antibodies in PBST with 3% dry
milk (Sigma) overnight at 4◦C and with secondary an-
tibodies for 2 h. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies (Cell
Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA) were direct-
ed against pcRaf-1(Ser338; 1:250) or pcRaf-1(Ser259;
1:500). A monoclonal mouse antibody anti α-tubulin
(Promega, Madison, WI) was used as a control of pro-
tein loading. The bands were detected using ECL de-
tection kits (ECL, Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ),
visualized using the Kodak Image Station 440CF, and
analyzed using the molecular Imaging Software, ver-
sion 4.0 (Rochester, NY) and NIH image J software.
All data was normalized against tubulin immunoreac-
tivity and expressed as percent of control values. PKA
activity from the same hippocampal tissue lysates were
measured using a non-Radioactive PKA activity assay
kit (Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI), which is based on
a solid phase enzyme-linked immuno-absorbent assay
(ELISA) using a synthetic peptide as a substrate for
PKA and a polyclonal antibody against the phospho-
rylated form of the substrate. All determinations of
PKA activity were performed at least in quintuplicate,
repeated twice in separate experiment, and expressed
as percentage of NT control values.
N2a cell cultures and caffeine treatment
Following dibutyryl cAMP-induced neuronal differ-
entiation, cultured SweAPP N2a cells were treated with
caffeine in either a concentration- or time-dependent
manner.
For the concentration-dependent treatment,
cells were administered a serial dilution of caffeine
ranging from 0 µM-1 mM to establish the optimal range
of caffeine action on GSK-3 activity. After Western
blot analysis established this range as 0–20 µM, cells
were treated with a serial dilution in this range. Cul-
tures were incubated at 37◦C for 1 h prior to lysis with
ice-cold lysis buffer. For the time-dependent applica-
tion, cells were given a 20 µM concentrationof caffeine
and incubated at time points ranging from 0–180 min
prior to lysis.
For Western blotting, aliquots containing up to 50 µg
of total protein were electrophoretically separated.
Electrophoresedproteins were then transferredto nitro-
cellulose membranes and blocked for 1 h at room tem-
perature in Tris-buffered saline. After blocking, mem-
branes were hybridized overnight at 4◦C with prima-
ry antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) against
total GSK-3α/β or active GSK-3α/β [(pTyr279/216
residues); diluted 1:500 or 1:1000,respectively]. Mem-
branes were then washed 3 × for 5 min each and in-
cubated for 1 h at room temperature with the appropri-
ate HRP-conjugated secondary antibody. Blots were
developed using a luminol reagent, and densitometric
analysis of the blots ensued.
Statistical analysis
Behavioral performance was statistically evaluated
to determine any group difference based on transgenic-
ity or caffeine treatment.
For the single day tasks,
one-way ANOVAs were used.
For multi-day tasks,
both one-way ANOVAs and two-way repeated mea-
sure ANOVAs were performed. Prior to analysis, Mor-
ris water maze (MWM) data was broken down into 2-
day blocks and the RAWM data was divided into 3-
day blocks, to aid in data presentation and analysis.
After ANOVA analysis, post hoc pair-by-pair differ-
ences between groups (planned comparisons) were re-
solved using the Fisher LSD test. Pre-treatment ver-
sus during-treatment RAWM performance was eval-
uated for each group separately, using paired t-tests.
All group comparisons were considered signiﬁcant at
p < 0.05.
While very few in number, any outliers
or non-performers (e.g., repeated circulars, consistent
ﬂoaters) in any given task were eliminated from statis-
tical analysis of that task. Data analyses involving Aβ
burden, Aβ levels, pcRaf-1 levels, and synaptophysin
immunoreactivity were performed using ANOVA. All
other statistical analyses are as indicated in the text.
In order to test if relationships were present between
neurohistologic, neurochemical, and behavioral mea-
sures, correlation analysis was performed using the Sy-
stat analytical software package (Systat Software, Inc.,
Chicago, IL).
To determine if the three groups of Study 1 (NT, Tg,
Tg/Caff) or the two groups of Study 2 (NT, NT/Caff)
could be distinguishable from one another based on
“overall” behavioral performance, discriminant func-
tion analysis (DFA) was performed using Systat soft-
ware. For Study 1, direct entry DFAs were performed
using seven behavioral measures collected from the
three cognitive-based tasks administered during treat-
ment. For Study 2, direct entry DFAs were also per-
formed, using 19 behavioral measures collected from
the entire behavioral battery. A complete description
of DFA multi-metric statistical analyses relevant to AD
transgenic mouse studies can be found in Leighty et
al. [25,28].

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
667
Fig. 1. Caffeine treatment reverses memory impairment in aged Tg mice. (A) Prior to caffeine administration, aged Tg mice were impaired in the
radial arm water maze task of working memory vs. non-transgenic (NT) controls. ∗p < 0.000005. (B) During the ﬁnal block of RAWM testing
at 4–5 weeks into caffeine treatment, aged Tg mice given caffeine (Tg/Caff) performed to the level of NT mice on working memory trials T4
and T5. ∗∗p < 0.025 for Tg control vs. other two groups. (C) Comparing pre-treatment vs. during-treatment trial T5 performance, Tg controls
failed to improve. However, Tg/Caff mice exhibited a dramatic improvement in working memory (∗∗p < 0.005; paired t-test), with NT controls
also improving (∗p < 0.05; paired t-test). (D) During the ﬁnal two days of platform recognition testing for strategy switching, Tg controls were
impaired, while Tg/Caff mice performed comparable to NT controls (∗p < 0.02 for Tg vs. NT). Group symbols deﬁned in (D). (Colours are
visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.
RESULTS
Caffeine treatment reverses working memory
impairment and normalizes identiﬁcation/recognition
ability in aged Tg mice
We have previously shown that long-term caffeine
treatment in young adult APPsw Tg mice protected
them against otherwiseinevitable cognitiveimpairment
in older age [13]. To determine if the same caffeine
treatment could beneﬁt aged Tg mice already demon-
strating cognitive impairment, caffeine treatment was
given in drinking water to 19 month-old APPsw mice.
Prior to caffeine administration, mice were evaluated
in the RAWM of working memory and veriﬁed to be
cognitive-impaired, as evidenced by many more errors
than NT littermate controls during delayed retention
Trial 5 (T5) for the last block of pre-treatment testing
(Fig. 1A). At 4–5 weeks into caffeine treatment, how-
ever, those impaired Tg mice given caffeine (Tg/Caff)
exhibited vastly superior working memory on Trials 4
and 5 compared to the continuing impairment of control

668
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
Tg mice (Fig. 1B). Indeed, the performance of Tg/Caff
mice was identical to that of NT controls during the
last block of testing. We further characterized the cog-
nitive beneﬁts of long-term caffeine treatment by com-
paring pre-treatment RAWM performance to “during
treatment” performance (Fig. 1C). In sharp contrast to
the inability of Tg controls to improve upon their poor
overall T5 working memory, Tg/Caff mice showed a
precipitous drop in errors during RAWM testing at 4–5
weeks into treatment. Even NT controls signiﬁcantly
improved upon their pre-treatment performance level,
although not to an error level lower than Tg/Caff mice.
We have consistently found that AD Tg mice are im-
paired in their ability to switch from the spatial strategy
of RAWM to the identiﬁcation/recognition strategy re-
quired for platform recognition testing [13,29,30]. To
determine if caffeine treatment can improve the “strat-
egy switching” ability of Tg mice, we evaluated mice
in the platform recognition task immediately following
completion of RAWM testing. As expected, Tg con-
trols were impaired overall (p < 0.01), and particularly
during the last two days of testing (Fig. 1D). However,
Tg/Caff mice were not different from NT mice on any
of the four test days or overall, signifying that caffeine
improved strategy switching ability in aged Tg mice
(Fig. 1D).
There were no group differences in tasks of sen-
sorimotor skill (open ﬁeld activity, balance beam,
string agility, Y-maze choices) and anxiety (elevated-
plus maze), indicating that neither genotype or caf-
feine treatment impacted these non-cognitive measures
(data not shown). Additionally, there were no group
differences in swim speed, as indexed by time taken
per choice during RAWM testing.
Aged Tg mice show “overall” cognitive beneﬁt with
caffeine treatment
Although evaluation of the effect of caffeine on in-
dividual cognitive measures is informative and impor-
tant, we have found that a collective evaluation across
multiple cognitive measures/tasks is a more insight-
ful approach for determining if a given AD therapeu-
tic has broad-based value in multiple cognitive do-
mains [22–24].
In this context, we have previous-
ly utilized discriminant function analysis (DFA) in re-
porting that caffeine treatment from young adulthood
through older age “protects” APPsw mice from over-
all cognitive impairment across multiple cognitive do-
mains [13,28].
To elucidate whether caffeine treat-
ment in aged Tg mice provides “overall” cognitive ben-
Fig. 2. A Canonical scores plot of discriminant function analysis
involving 7 cognitive measures collected from aged Tg mice at 4–5
weeks into caffeine treatment. Each symbol represents the cogni-
tive performance of one animal graphed from the two linear func-
tions derived in the discriminant function analysis (DFA). Group dif-
ferences in overall cognitive performance across multiple cognitive
measures/domains are evident, with Tg/Caff mice having superior
overall performance compared to Tg controls. Symbols: O = NT
mice; X = Tg mice; + = Tg/Caff mice. (Colours are visible in the
electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.
eﬁt spanning multiple measures/domains (e.g., work-
ing/spatial memory, identiﬁcation/recognition, gener-
al mnemonic function), we collectively evaluated all
seven of the cognitive measures attained “during treat-
ment” in the present study, utilizing direct entry DFA.
This approach was very effective in revealing that there
were clear differences in overall cognitive performance
between groups (Wilk’s λ = 0.126; p < 0.02) and
that the Tg/Caff group was signiﬁcantly better in over-
all cognitive performance compared to the Tg control
group (p < 0.05). Figure 2 shows the canonical scores
plot of this DFA for individual mice included in the
three groups of Study 1.
Caffeine treatment markedly reduces brain Aβ
deposition in aged Tg mice
Our prior work has demonstrated that oral caffeine
administration in young adult Tg mice for 5 1/2 months
suppresses levels of both BACE1 and PS1 in hip-
pocampus, resulting in lower hippocampal levels of
both soluble and insoluble Aβ [13]. This suppression
of both major enzymes involved in brain Aβ produc-
tion would suggest that caffeine administration, even
to aged Tg mice exhibiting robust Aβ pathology, could
reduce/reverse that pathology.
Therefore, we next
performed a neurohistologic analysis of total Aβ im-

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
669
Fig. 3. Caffeine treatment reduces the robust Aβ deposition present in aged Tg mice. Total Aβ deposition was strikingly reduced in both
the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus in aged Tg mice following two months of oral caffeine treatment. (Upper) Photomicrographs of Aβ
deposition staining in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus exemplifying the reduction in Aβ deposition induced by caffeine treatment. Scale
bar = 50 µm (Lower) Caffeine induced reductions of 46% and 40% in Aβ deposition within the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, respectively.
∗p < 0.001. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.
munostaining in the same aged Tg mice wherein caf-
feine administration reversed memory impairment. For
both entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, total Aβ de-
position was strikingly reduced in aged Tg mice fol-
lowing two months of oral caffeine treatment compared
to Tg controls (Fig. 3). Reductions of 46% and 40%
in Aβ deposition were evident within entorhinal cor-
tex and hippocampus, respectively, at 20–21 months of
age. These caffeine-induced reductions in Aβ deposi-
tion are clearly evident in representative photomicro-
graphs of Aβ immunostaining from entorhinal cortex
and hippocampus (Fig. 3).
Caffeine treatment reduces brain levels of “soluble”
Aβ in aged Tg mice, which correlate with extent of Aβ
deposition
We have previously reported that long-term oral ad-
ministration of caffeine to young adulthood Tg mice
induces a signiﬁcant 37% reduction in hippocampal
Aβ1−40 levels, as measured by ELISA [13]. In the
present study, we wished to determine if brain soluble
Aβ levels could also be reduced by caffeine treatment in
aged Tg mice bearing high brain levels of both Aβ 1−40
and Aβ1−42. In the same aged Tg mice wherein rever-

670
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
Fig. 4. Long-term caffeine treatment to aged Tg mice reduces soluble Aβ levels in both cortex and hippocampus; Hippocampal soluble Aβ levels
correlate with hippocampal Aβ deposition. (A) At two months into oral caffeine treatment, hippocampal and cortical levels of both Aβ1−40
and Aβ1−42 were reduced in comparison to values from Tg controls. ∗p < 0.05 versus Tg control mice. Abbreviations: N.D., non-detectable.
(B) In hippocampus (but not in cortex), signiﬁcant correlations were evident between soluble Aβ and deposited Aβ, indicative of a dynamic
equilibrium between these two pools of Aβ in the hippocampus. Each group consisted of 5–8 mice. (Colours are visible in the electronic version
of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
sal of cognitive impairment was exhibited, measure-
ment of brain soluble Aβ levels at 20–21 months of
age (approximately 2 months into treatment) revealed
signiﬁcant decreases in both cortical and hippocampal
Aβ levels for caffeine-treated mice (Fig. 4A). Aβ1−42
levels were signiﬁcantly reduced in both cortex (↓51%)
and hippocampus (↓59%) of caffeine-treated Tg mice
compared to Tg controls. Similarly, Aβ1−40 levels in
Tg mice were signiﬁcantly reduced in cortex (↓25%)
and nearly reduced (p = 0.09) in hippocampus (↓37%)
by caffeine treatment.
To determine if an association exists between solu-
ble and deposited Aβ pools in the brains of these aged
Tg mice, correlation analysis was performed between
extent of hippocampal Aβ deposition and Aβ1−40 or
Aβ1−42 levels, irrespective of treatment. The results
of these correlation analyses indicate a clear relation-
ship between extent of hippocampal Aβ deposition and
hippocampal levels of Aβ1−40 (Fig. 4B) and Aβ1−42
(Fig. 4C). These correlations underscore a dynamic re-

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
671
Fig. 5. Long-term caffeine treatment to aged APPsw mice did not affect synaptophysin immunostaining in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3
regions. Both Tg and Tg/Caff mice exhibited aberrantly high synaptophysin staining, typically seen in aged APPsw mice due to intense staining
of dystrophic nerve terminals. Scale bar = 20 µm. ∗p < 0.001 versus NT group. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at
www.iospress.nl.
lationship between deposited and soluble forms of Aβ
in the brain, which is involved in the modulation of
brain Aβ by caffeine (see diagrams in Fig. 10).
Synaptophysin immunostaining in hippocampus of
aged Tg mice is not affected by caffeine treatment
Synaptophysinimmunostaining/immunoreactivityis
a marker for total synaptic area – not number of synap-
tic terminals – in a given brain region. As such, we
have observed increases in hippocampal synaptophysin
immunoreactivity following several therapeutics that
provide cognitive beneﬁt to AD Tg mice such as envi-
ronmental enrichment [11,24] and T-cell immunother-
apy [30]. Therefore, we subsequently wished to de-
termine if the beneﬁcial cognitive effects of caffeine
in aged Tg mice was associated with changes in hip-
pocampal synaptophysin immunostaining. As shown
in Fig. 5, caffeine treatment did not impact synapto-
physin immunostaining in the hippocampal CA1 and
CA3 regions of Tg mice. Irrespective of treatment, Tg
mice exhibited enhanced synaptophysin immunostain-
ing in comparison to NT controls (Fig. 5), which is
consistent with our prior work [31] and probably in-
dicative of the intense synaptophysin immunostaining
associated with dystrophic nerve terminals in Tg mice.
Caffeine treatment down-regulates the active form of
cRaf-1 in hippocampus from Tg mice: Possible
linkage to BACE1 suppression
Because we have previously reported that long-
term caffeine treatment decreases BACE1 expression

672
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
in brains of AD Tg mice [13] and also found caffeine-
induced reductions in brain Aβ levels in the present
study, we wished to developinsight into possible mech-
anism(s) involved in BACE1 suppression by caffeine.
The cRaf-1 is a cytosolic protein kinase and is an inte-
gral part of the Ras/cRaf/ERK pathway that regulates
cell proliferation, survival, and senescence. When per-
sistently activated through phosphorylation at its Ser-
ine 338 site, cRaf-1 stimulates the transcription factor
nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) [32], which then can
stimulate expression of BACE1 and other AD-linked
proteins [33]. Phosphorylation of cRaf-1 at its Serine
259 site stabilizes cRaf-1 in an inactive conformation,
thus suppressing BACE1 expression. These relation-
ships are diagramed in Fig. 10.
In a second caffeine treatment study, we therefore
examined the hippocampus of 9.5 month-old Tg mice
that had been given oral caffeine treatment via gavage
for two weeks prior to euthanization. Analysis of hip-
pocampal levels of the inactive form of cRaf-1 (pcRaf-
1[Ser259]) by Western blot revealed a signiﬁcant down-
regulation of this inactive form in Tg controls to 42%
of NT control levels (Fig. 6A). In sharp contrast, Tg
mice that had been treated with caffeine for only two
weeks exhibited active cRaf-1 (pcRaf-1[Ser338]) levels
that were signiﬁcantly lower than Tg controls (↓27%;
Fig. 6B) and inactive cRaf-1 (pcRaf1[Ser259]) that
were signiﬁcantly higher than Tg controls (↑141%;
Fig. 6A). Moreover, we also determined from the same
hippocampal tissue lysates that a signiﬁcant decrease
(↓29%) in protein kinase A (PKA) activity was present
in Tg controls and that caffeine treatment signiﬁcant-
ly increased PKA activity (↑25%) in Tg mice to lev-
els exhibited by NT mice (Fig. 6C). Since PKA con-
verts active to inactive cRaf-1, these results are consis-
tent with a PKA/Raf-1 mediated mechanism of BACE1
suppression by caffeine (see Fig. 10).
Caffeine induces concentration- and time-dependent
decreases in both active and total GSK-3 levels in
SweAPP N2a cells
We have reported that chronic caffeine treatment re-
duces PS1 expression/γ-secretase activity in AD Tg
mice, presumably contributing to the decreased Aβ
production also observed [13]. In the present study,
we next examined the potential involvement of GSK-
3 in caffeine’s reduction of γ-secretase-mediated Aβ
production, as GSK-3 is reported to regulate Aβ pro-
duction by interfering with γ-secretase cleavage [20,
34].
To identify the possible actions of caffeine on
this essential component of the AD pathogenic path-
way, Western blot analysis was performed on SweAPP
N2a cell lysates using antibodies against both active
and total GSK-3. A concentration-dependent decrease
in both GSK-3α and GSK-3β was evident, with sig-
niﬁcant reductions achieved at caffeine concentrations
of 10 and 20 µM (Fig. 7). This effect was observed
on active GSK-3 (pTyr216/279) protein levels (A), as
well as on GSK-3 holo protein levels (C). Caffeine al-
so exerted a time-dependent decrease in both GSK-3
isoforms, as shown in Fig. 7. Signiﬁcant reductions
in active protein levels were seen in both GSK3 iso-
forms at time-points exceeding 120 minutes (B). How-
ever, signiﬁcant alterations in holo protein levels were
isoform-speciﬁc, with GSK-3β reduction by 30 min-
utes and GSK-3α reduction by 90 minutes (D). It is
noteworthy that, while active GSK-3 levels declined as
caffeine concentration was raised from 0 to 16 µM, ac-
tive GSK-3 levels increased as caffeine concentration
was elevated from 31.2 µM to 1 mM (data not shown).
Thus, approximately 20 µM was determined to be the
optimal caffeine concentration for active GSK-3α and
GSK-β inhibition, which corresponds to that typically
observed in the blood and brain of humans following
1–2 cups of coffee [1].
Long-term caffeine treatment from adulthood through
old age does not provide cognitive beneﬁt to normal
mice
It is possible that the caffeine-induced reversal of
cognitive impairment that we observed in aged Tg mice
involved non-speciﬁc, generalized mechanisms such as
increased glucose utilization [35], resulting in the well-
known ability of caffeinetoincrease alertness/attention.
If such generalized, non-amyloidogenic mechanisms
were critical for the cognitive beneﬁts seen in Tg mice,
we reasoned that NT mice should also beneﬁt from
long-term caffeine treatment. Therefore, in a third caf-
feine treatment study, we began providing 5 1/2 month-
old NT (normal) mice with caffeine in their drinking
water and behaviorally evaluated them at 10 months
into caffeine treatment (e.g., 15–16 months of age).
Parenthetically, no truly long-term caffeine administra-
tion studies (over months) have been done previously
in rodents that might relate to habitual caffeine use in
humans.
As shown in Fig. 8, life-long caffeine administration
had no effect on cognitive performance of NT mice
across 13 measures in ﬁve cognitively-based tasks (Y-
maze percent alternation, standard Morris water maze,

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
673
Fig. 6. In the hippocampus of Tg mice, caffeine treatment increases the “inactive” form (A) and decreases the active form (B) of cRaf-1, while
also increasing protein kinese A (PKA) activity back to normal levels. Two weeks of oral caffeine treatment was given to 9 month-old Tg mice
and their hippocampus analyzed. (A) The signiﬁcant decrease in inactive cRaf-1 (pcRaf-1[Ser259]) that was evident in Tg controls was reversed
by caffeine treatment to the level of NT controls. ∗p < 0.05 versus other two groups (B) Caffeine treatment decreased the levels of active cRaf-1
(pcRaf-1[Ser338] in Tg mice treated with caffeine compared to Tg control mice. Tubulin or GADPH served as non-speciﬁc protein controls.
∗p < 0.05 versus Tg group. (C) The signiﬁcant decrease in hippocampal PKA activity present in Tg mice was reversed by caffeine treatment
back to levels present in NT mice. ∗p < 0.02 for Tg controls versus other two groups. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article
at www.iospress.nl.
circular platform, platform recognition, and radial arm
water maze). It should be noted that cognitive perfor-
mance of the control NT mice at 15–16 months of age
was not outstanding, thus allowing for possible thera-
peutic improvement. Chronic caffeine administration
did not affect sensorimotor (open ﬁeld activity, balance
beam, string agility) or anxiety (elevated-plus maze)
measures, nor did it affect swim speed in water-based

674
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
Fig. 7. Caffeine induces concentration- and time-dependent decreases in both GSK-3α and GSK-β expression in vitro. SweAPP N2a cells
were treated with a range of caffeine concentrations for 1 h (A,C) or with a 20 µM concentration of caffeine over a range of time points
(B,D). Prepared lysates were subjected to Western blot (WB) analysis using antibodies against active GSK-3α (pTyr216 residue) and GSK-3β
(pTyr279 residue) isoforms (A,B) or against total GSK-3α and GSK-β (C and D). Anti-actin antibodies were used as an internal reference
control for each WB. Histograms depict densitometric analysis of three independent experiments, with a representative WB of each experiment
displayed. Isoform-speciﬁc band to actin ratios are delineated on histogram y-axes, and concentration- or time-points are depicted on x-axes.
Asterisks denote signiﬁcant differences (p < 0.05) between speciﬁc concentration- or time-group and the control group (0 µM or 0 minutes),
using a Mann-Whitney test for pair wise comparisons of non-parametric data. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at
www.iospress.nl.
tasks (data not shown). A direct entry DFA performed
across all 19 behavioral measures of the test battery
also indicated no signiﬁcance discrimination between
caffeine-treated and control NT mice in overall behav-
ioral performance.
DISCUSSION
This study provides the ﬁrst evidence that caffeine
treatment can reverse cognitive impairment and AD
neuropathology in a model for the disease.
Aged,

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
675
Fig. 8. Long-term caffeine treatment does not provide cognitive beneﬁts to normal (non-transgenic) mice in multiple tasks. A total of 13 measures
were evaluated in 5 cognitive-based tasks: (A) Y-maze spontaneous alternation, (B and C) Morris water maze acquisition and memory retention,
(D) Circular platform, (E) platform recognition, and (F) radial arm water maze. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at
www.iospress.nl.
cognitively-impaired APPsw mice given a moderate
amount of daily caffeine (the human equivalent of 5
cups of coffee)exhibiteda restoration of workingmem-
ory to the level of normal, aged mice. In these same
aged AD mice, which had pre-existing and substantial
Aβ burdens, caffeine treatment reduced both soluble
and deposited (insoluble) brain Aβ levels. Caffeine-
induced cognitive restoration is likely due to its pro-
found ability to reduce Aβ production by reducing ex-
pression of both BACE1 and PS1/γ-secretase [13]. The
present study provides mechanistic insight into both of
these caffeinergic actions by showing that 1) caffeine
administration to APPsw mice was able to correct their
dysregulation of the Raf-1/NFκB inﬂammatory path-
way, which is linked to BACE expression, and 2) caf-
feine suppressed both α and β isoforms of GSK-3 in
vitro, which are linked to PS1/γ-secretase activity and
tau hyperphosphorylation, respectively. The extent to
which these caffeinergic effects involve adenosine re-
ceptor antagonism are unknown and currently being
investigated.
We recently reported that caffeine, when adminis-
tered from young adulthood through older age, pro-
tected APPsw mice from otherwise certain impairment
in multiple cognitive domains and reduced their brain
Aβ levels [13]. These results, suggestive that moderate
daily intake of caffeine could delay or reduce the risk
of AD, are supportive of an earlier epidemiologic study
showing that AD patients consumed much less caffeine
in the 20 years prior to disease onset compared to same-
aged individuals who were non-demented [9]. More
recent longitudinal studies have also reported protec-
tive effects of caffeine/coffee intake against cognitive
impairment during normal aging [6,7] and AD [8]. The
evidence for the protective effects of caffeine against
aged-associated cognitive impairment and AD, which

676
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
Fig. 9. Diagrams depicting the inhibitory actions of caffeine on Aβ production and resultant lower brain Aβ levels/deposition. Unmodulated:
Newly produced Aβ enters a dynamic equilibrium between soluble and deposited (insoluble) Aβ in the brain, with continual transport of soluble
Aβ into plasma. Caffeine: Long-Term: Caffeine suppression of both β- and γ-secretase activities reduces Aβ production, resulting in lower
soluble Aβ in the brain. These lower levels of brain soluble Aβ induce a ﬂux of insoluble Aβ out of the deposited form and into the soluble
form, which is then cleared into plasma via soluble Aβ transport. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.
is nicely reviewed by Rosso et al. [10], is in contrast
to the reality that human intake of caffeine usually de-
creases during aging – this, despite the fact that the
metabolism and physiologic responses to caffeine are
the same in elderly and younger individuals [36].
Accompanying the caffeine-induced cognitive res-
toration in aged APPsw mice was a reversal of Aβ de-
position and decrease in soluble Aβ levels within their
brains. These reductions in both soluble and deposited
(insoluble) forms of Aβ would be expected, given that
caffeine decreases Aβ production through suppression
of both BACE and PS1/γ-secretase expression [13].
Newly produced Aβ enters a dynamic equilibrium be-
tween soluble and deposited Aβ in the brain, with con-
tinual transport of soluble Aβ out of the brain and into
plasma down a concentration gradient (Fig. 9, Unmod-
ulated). We hypothesize that caffeine suppression of
Aβ production results in lower brain levels of soluble
Aβ, which then induces a ﬂux of insoluble Aβ out of
the deposited form and into the soluble form (Fig. 9,
Caffeine). This newly-solublized Aβ would then be
cleared into the plasma via Aβ transport. Supportive
of this dynamic equilibrium hypothesis are the strong
correlations that we report in aged APPsw mice be-
tween soluble Aβ (both 1–40 and 1–42) and deposited
Aβ in hippocampus. Moreover, the additional correla-
tions that we report between both soluble and deposited
forms of Aβ versus cognitive performance clearly un-
derscore a direct impact of this dynamic equilibrium on
cognitive performance. Indeed, caffeine’s reversal of
cognitive dysfunction in aged APPsw mice most like-
ly involves lowering of both soluble and deposited Aβ
through this equilibrium.
The present study presents new mechanistic in-
sight into how caffeine may suppress both BACE1
and PS1/γ-secretase expression to decrease Aβ pro-
duction.
Whether or not this caffeine-induced de-
crease in Aβ production is direct or involves adeno-
sine receptor blockade/mediationis currentlyunknown.
There certainly exists considerable evidence that the
actions of caffeine against Aβ are mediated through
antagonism of A2a and/or A1 adenosine receptors,
particularly in the context that 1) caffeine and se-
lective A2a receptor antagonists both provide protec-
tion against Aβ neurotoxicity in vitro [37]; 2) caf-
feine and/or selective A2a receptor antagonists protect
against the cognitive impairment induced by intrac-
erebral Aβ1−42 or Aβ25−35 infusion in mice [38,39];
and 3) acetylcholine neurotransmission in hippocam-
pus/cortex is increased through pre-synaptic A1 recep-
tor blockade [40]. Although we have determined that
brain adenosine receptor levels are unaffected by long-

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
677
Fig. 10. Diagram depicting 1) stimulatory actions of “active” cRaf-1 on NFκB activation, resulting in increased BACE1 expression and Aβ
production, and 2) caffeine’s activation of PKA, resulting in enhanced levels of ‘inactive” cRaf-1 and less Aβ production. (Colours are visible in
the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.
term caffeine treatment in AD transgenic mice [13], a
rich body of scientiﬁc ﬁndings suggests that the pos-
sibility of adenosine-receptor-mediated actions needs
further investigation [41].
Regarding BACE1 suppression,we provide evidence
that caffeine is able to correct a dysregulation of the
cRaf-1 inﬂammatory pathway in APPsw mice by stim-
ulating PKA activity, thus increasing brain levels of
“inactive” cRaf-1 (pcRaf-1[Ser259]) and reducing the
active form of cRaf-1 phosphorylated at Serine 338
(pcRaf-1[Ser338]). Serine(s) 259 and S621 bind to 14-
3-3, a protein that maintains cRaf-1 in an inhibited state
(phosphorylatedat Serine 259) in basal conditions. Af-
ter stimulation, active Ras displaces 14-3-3 proteins,
cRaf-1 is trans-located to the plasma membrane, de-
phosphorylated by phosphatases at this site and phos-
phorylated at the kinase domain at the Serine 338 ac-
tivation site [42]. As shown in Fig. 10, “active” Raf
stimulates NFκB intracellularly, resulting in increased
expression of reporter genes such as BACE1 [43,44].
It should be noted that cRaf-1 has been reported to be
over-activated in AD brains [15,45].
In this study, we demonstrate that caffeine stimulates
PKA activity in the hippocampus of treated AD Tg
mice, which is consistent with similar effects of caffeine
in peripheral tissues [46,47]. This enhanced PKA activ-
ity then inhibits (inactivate) cRaf-1 by phosphorylation
at serine259 [48], decreasing NFκB activity and the
expression of NFκB-controlled genes such as BACE1;
thus, decreased Aβ production results (Fig. 10). Sup-
portive of the idea that the cRaf-1/NFκB pathway plays
a key role in Aβ production and toxicity in the brain is
our recent discovery that the Raf-1 inhibitor Sorafenib
inhibits NFκB signaling and ameliorates memory im-
pairment in aged APPsw mice [49]. Caffeine treatment
has often been associated with the inhibition of phos-
phodiesterases (PDEs); indeed, we and others have re-
ported that treatment with the PDE inhibitor Rolipram
improves working memory of AD transgenic mice [50,
51]. However, caffeine’s inhibition of PDE occurs at
mM concentrations [1], well above blood levels of caf-
feine that are achievable in rodents/humans. We there-
fore believe that the profound ability of caffeine to re-
duce brain Aβ pathology is due to its suppression of
both β- and γ-secretases [13].
Consistent with this
premise, Rolipram was unable to decrease Aβ levels in
vivo [51].
A potential mechanism through which caffeine sup-
presses PS1/γ-secretase (to reduce Aβ production)
was also explored in the present study.
Dysregula-
tion of GSK-3 is a key feature of AD pathogene-
sis, with the activity of both α and β isoforms play-
ing critical roles [52]. While GSK-3β directly binds
PS1 [53], GSK-3α is most notable for enhancing
PS1/γ-secretase activity and consequently increasing
Aβ production [20].
In vitro studies demonstrate

678
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
that siRNA inhibition of GSK-3α drastically reduces
Aβ production by interfering with γ-secretase cleav-
age of APP [20], likely through disruption of APP-
PS1 association [34]. Furthermore, conditional over-
expression of GSK-3β results in increased tau phospho-
rylation, neuronal apoptosis, reactive gliosis, and spa-
tial learning deﬁcits in the Tet/GSK-3β mouse model
for AD [19,54]. This AD-like phenotype is completely
reversed once GSK-3β overexpression is ceased and
GSK-3β activity returns to normal [55]. In the present
study, we report that caffeine suppresses GSK-3α and
GSK-3β levels in SweAPP N2a cell cultures in both a
dose- and time-dependent fashion. Moreover, caffeine
impacted both active and holoprotein(total)GSK-3 lev-
els, suggesting that caffeine does not diminish GSK-3
activity through direct substrate-level phosphorylation,
but rather through alternations in protein production or
degradation.
Because optimal GSK-3 inhibition was obtained
with a 20 µM concentration of caffeine in vitro, actions
of caffeine that only occur at much higher concentra-
tions are unlikely candidates to mechanistically explain
both our in vitro and in vivo observations [1]. Indeed, a
10–20 µM plasma and brain concentration of caffeine
would be quickly reached (1–2 hours) in humans fol-
lowing ingestion of 1–2 cups of coffee [1]. This under-
scores that the effects of caffeine on GSK-3 are readi-
ly attained at physiologically relevant concentrations –
in fact, the same 10–20 µM concentration of caffeine
effectively inhibits both Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 produc-
tion by SweAPP N2a cell cultures [13]. Reductions
in GSK-3 thus represent a further mechanism through
which caffeine may ameliorate AD pathology and re-
stores cognitive function. Accordingly, reduction of
GSK-3 levels/activity in the brain is in itself a pursued
AD therapy [52].
In addition to the aforementioned mechanisms of
caffeine action directly impacting Aβ production, there
are multiple “non-amyloidogenic” mechanisms that
could contribute to the ability of caffeine to protect
against or reverse memory impairment. Since inﬂam-
mation is an essential part of the AD pathogenic path-
way [56] and AD is characterized by increased oxida-
tive stress, it is possible that the anti-inﬂammatory [46]
and antioxidant [57] actions of caffeine contribute to
its pro-cognitive affects. It is important to emphasize
that generalized mechanisms of caffeine action (e.g.,
increased glucose utilization) may also be contributo-
ry [35] to the cognitive reversal observed.
Howev-
er, our ﬁnding that life-long caffeine treatment to non-
transgenic mice did not provide any cognitive bene-
ﬁts in old age does not support this possibility – par-
ticularly given that there was ample room for cogni-
tive improvement when testing occurred in older age.
Nonetheless, if the same caffeine treatment paradigm
had been given to aged “normal” mice as was given
to aged Tg mice, beneﬁcial cognitive effects may have
been revealed. Indeed, generalized mechanisms (such
as increased glucose utilization) may play a role be-
cause the substantial brain Aβ levels in aged APPsw
mice reduce their cerebral blood ﬂow [58].
Although caffeine has been reported to have effects
on dendritic morphology during post-natal develop-
ment [59], we presently found no effect of long-term
caffeine treatment on synaptic area in hippocampus
of aged APPsw mice. Regarding caffeine effects on
synaptic function, several electrophysiologic studies
involving hippocampal slice recordings from the hip-
pocampal CA1 region have reported that caffeine in-
creases the amplitude of EPSPs [60,61] and induces
a novel pre-synaptic form of long-term potentiation
(LTP) [62]. However, because all such studies have in-
volved caffeine concentrations well above physiologic
levels (e.g., 0.1–10 mM), electrophysiologicstudies in-
volving caffeine concentrations relevant to tissue levels
of caffeineachievedwith humanor rodent caffeinecon-
sumption (e.g., 10–30 µM) are necessary to determine
the impact of caffeine impact on synaptic transmission.
Finally, caffeine has very recently been shown to block
disruptions in the blood-brain barrier induced by a high
cholesterol diet in rabbit [63].
Since breakdown of
the blood-brain barrier has been reported in AD [64]
and appears to precede Aβ plaque formation in APPsw
transgenic mice [65], blood-brain barrier stabilization
by caffeine is a viable mechanism for consideration.
All of the aforementioned non-amyloidogenic and
generalized mechanisms of caffeine action notwith-
standing, the cognitive restoration providedto aged AD
transgenic mice by caffeine treatment in the present
study would appear to be mostly due to the profound
ability of caffeine to reduce Aβ production via secre-
tase suppression,and in the process result in brain clear-
ance of both soluble and deposited/insoluble Aβ. Giv-
en the safety, availability, and brain bioavailability of
caffeine, its ability to suppress both β- and γ-secretases
would suggest it is preferable to synthetic secretase in-
hibitors currently under development. Based on the ro-
bust protective and treatment effects of caffeine that we
have observed in AD transgenic mice, we have initiated
clinical trials with caffeine.

G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
679
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by grants to (G.W.A.)
and (H.P.) within the NIA-designated Florida Alzhei-
mer’s Disease Research Center (P50AG025711), as
well as by funds from the Byrd Alzheimer’s Center and
Research Institute. H.P. holds the Eric Pfeifer chair for
Alzheimer’s research at the Suncoast Gerontology Cen-
ter, University of South Florida College of Medicine.
REFERENCES
[1]
Fredholm B, B¨attig K, Holm´en J, Nehlig A, Zvartau E (1999)
Actions of caffeine in the brain with special reference to factors
that contribute to its widespread use. Pharmacol Rev 51, 83-
133.
[2]
Ruhl C, Everhart J (2005) Coffee and caffeine consumption
reduce the risk of elevated serum alanine aminotransferase
activity in the United States. Gastroenterology 128, 24-32.
[3]
Higdon J, Frei B (2006) Coffee and health: a review of recent
human research. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 46, 101-123.
[4]
Ross G, Abbott R, Petrovitch H, Morens D, Grandinetti A,
Tung K, Tanner C, Masaki K, Blanchette P, Curb J, Popper J,
White L (2000) Association of coffee and caffeine intake with
the risk of Parkinson disease. JAMA 283, 2674-2679.
[5]
Hern´an M, Takkouche B, Caama˜no-Isorna F, Gestal-Otero J
(2002) A meta-analysis of coffee drinking, cigarette smoking,
and the risk of Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 52, 276-284.
[6]
Ritchie K, Carri`ere I, de Mendonca A, Portet F, Dartigues J,
Rouaud O, Barberger-Gateau P, Ancelin M (2007) The neuro-
protective effects of caffeine: a prospective population study
(the Three City Study). Neurology 69, 536-545.
[7]
van Gelder B, Buijsse B, Tijhuis M, Kalmijn S, Giampaoli
S, Nissinen A, Kromhout D (2007) Coffee consumption is
inversely associated with cognitive decline in elderly European
men: the FINE Study. Eur J Clin Nutr 61, 226-232.
[8]
Eckelinen M, Ngandu T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipel-
to M (2008) Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the risk
of late-life dementia: A population-based CAIDE study. J
Alzheimer’s Dis 16, 85-91
[9]
Maia L, de Mendonc¸a A (2002) Does caffeine intake protect
from Alzheimer’s disease? Eur J Neurol 9, 377-382.
[10]
Rosso A, Lippa C, Mossey J (2008) Caffeine: Neuroprotec-
tive Functions in Cognition and Alzheimer’s Disease. Am J
Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 23, 417-422.
[11]
Arendash G, Garcia M, Costa D, Cracchiolo J, Wefes I, Potter
H (2004) Environmental enrichment improves cognition in
aged Alzheimer’s transgenic mice despite stable beta-amyloid
deposition. Neuroreport 15, 1751-1754.
[12]
Arendash G, Lewis J, Leighty R, McGowan E, Cracchiolo J,
Hutton M, Garcia M (2004) Multi-metric behavioral compar-
ison of APPsw and P301L models for Alzheimer’s disease:
linkage of poorer cognitive performance to tau pathology in
forebrain. Brain Res 1012, 29-41.
[13]
Arendash G, Schleif W, Rezai-Zadeh K, Jackson E, Zacharia
L, Cracchiolo J, Shippy D, Tan J (2006) Caffeine protects
Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment and reduces
brain beta-amyloid production. Neuroscience 142, 941-952.
[14]
Keller E, Fu Z, Brennan M (2004) The role of Raf kinase in-
hibitor protein (RKIP) in health and disease. Biochem Phar-
macol 68, 1049-1053.
[15]
Mei M, Su B, Harrison K, Chao M, Siedlak S, Previll L, Jack-
son L, Cai D, Zhu X (2006) Distribution, levels and phos-
phorylation of Raf-1 in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 99,
1377-1388.
[16]
Woodgett J (1990) Molecular cloning and expression of glyco-
gen synthase kinase-3/factor A. EMBO J 9, 2431-2438.
[17]
Grimes C, Jope R (2001) CREB DNA binding activity is in-
hibited by glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta and facilitated by
lithium. J Neurochem 78, 1219-1232.
[18]
Grimes C, Jope R (2001) The multifaceted roles of glycogen
synthase kinase 3beta in cellular signaling. Prog Neurobiol 65,
391-426.
[19]
Hern´andez F, Borrell J, Guaza C, Avila J, Lucas J (2002) Spa-
tial learning deﬁcit in transgenic mice that conditionally over-
express GSK-3beta in the brain but do not form tau ﬁlaments.
J Neurochem 83, 1529-1533.
[20]
Phiel C, Wilson C, Lee V, Klein P (2003) GSK-3alpha reg-
ulates production of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-beta pep-
tides. Nature 423, 435-439.
[21]
Takashima A (2006) GSK-3 is essential in the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 9, 309-317.
[22]
Jensen M, Mottin M, Cracchiolo J, Leighty R, Arendash G
(2005) Lifelong immunization with human beta-amyloid (1-
42) protects Alzheimer’s transgenic mice against cognitive
impairment throughout aging. Neuroscience 130, 667-684.
[23]
Arendash G, Jensen M, Salem N, Hussein N, Cracchiolo J,
Dickson A, Leighty R, Potter H (2007) A diet high in omega-3
fatty acids does not improve or protect cognitive performance
in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Neuroscience 149, 286-302.
[24]
Cracchiolo J, Mori T, Nazian S, Tan J, Potter H, Arendash
G (2007) Enhanced cognitive activity–over and above social
or physical activity–is required to protect Alzheimer’s mice
against cognitive impairment, reduce Abeta deposition, and
increase synaptic immunoreactivity. Neurobiol Learn Mem 88,
277-294.
[25]
Leighty R, Nilsson L, Potter H, Costa D, Low M, Bales K, Paul
S, Arendash G (2004) Use of multimetric statistical analysis
to characterize and discriminate between the performance of
four Alzheimer’s transgenic mouse lines differing in Abeta
deposition. Behav Brain Res 153, 107-121.
[26]
Mori T, Town T, Tan J, Yada N, Horikoshi Y, Yamamoto J,
Shimoda T, Kamanaka Y, Tateishi N, Asano T (2006) Arundic
acid ameliorates cerebral amyloidosis and gliosis in Alzheimer
transgenic mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 318, 571-578.
[27]
Tan J, Town T, Crawford F, Mori T, DelleDonne A, Crescentini
R, Obregon D, Flavell R, Mullan M (2002) Role of CD40
ligand in amyloidosis in transgenic Alzheimer’s mice. Nat
Neurosci 5, 1288-1293.
[28]
Leighty R, Runfeldt M, Berndt D, Schleif W, Cracchiolo J,
Potter H, Arendash G (2008) Use of artiﬁcial neural networks
to determine cognitive impairment and therapeutic effective-
ness in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. J Neurosci Methods 167,
358-366.
[29]
Austin L, Arendash G, Gordon M, Diamond D, DiCarlo G,
Dickey C, Ugen K, Morgan D (2003) Short-term beta-amyloid
vaccinations do not improve cognitive performance in cogni-
tively impaired APP + PS1 mice. Behav Neurosci 117, 478-
484.
[30]
Ethell D, Shippy D, Cao C, Cracchiolo J, Runfeldt M, Blake
B, Arendash G (2006) Abeta-speciﬁc T-cells reverse cognitive
decline and synaptic loss in Alzheimer’s mice. Neurobiol Dis
23, 351-361.

680
G.W. Arendash et al. / Caffeine Reverses Memory Impairment in AD Mice
[31]
King D, Arendash G (2002) Behavioral characterization of the
Tg2576 transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease through 19
months. Physiol Behav 75, 627-642.
[32]
Li S, Janosch P, Tanji M, Rosenfeld G, Waymire J, Mischak H,
Kolch W, Sedivy J (1995) Regulation of Raf-1 kinase activity
by the 14-3-3 family of proteins. EMBO J 14, 685-696.
[33]
Bourne K, Ferrari D, Lange-Dohna C, Rossner S, Wood T,
Perez-Polo J (2007) Differential regulation of BACE1 pro-
moter activity by nuclear factor-kappaB in neurons and glia
upon exposure to beta-amyloid peptides. J Neurosci Res 85,
1194-1204.
[34]
Rezai-Zadeh K, Shytle R, Bai Y, Tian J, Hou H, Mori
T, Zeng J, Obregon D, Town T, Tan J (2009) Flavonoid-
mediated presenilin-1 phosphorylation reduces Alzheimer’s
disease beta-amyloid production. J Cell Mol Med 13, 574-588.
[35]
Nehlig A, Daval J, Debry G (1992) Caffeine and the central
nervous system: mechanisms of action, biochemical, metabol-
ic and psychostimulant effects. Brain Res Rev 17, 139-170.
[36]
Massey L (1998) Caffeine and the elderly. Drugs Aging 13,
43-50.
[37]
Dall’Igna O, Porci´uncula L, Souza D, Cunha R, Lara D,
Dall’lgna O (2003) Neuroprotection by caffeine and adeno-
sine A2A receptor blockade of beta-amyloid neurotoxicity. Br
J Pharmacol 138, 1207-1209.
[38]
Cunha G, Canas P, Melo C, Hockemeyer J, M¨uller C, Oliveira
C, Cunha R (2008) Adenosine A2A receptor blockade prevents
memory dysfunction caused by beta-amyloid peptides but not
by scopolamine or MK-801. Exp Neurol 210, 776-781.
[39]
Dall’Igna O, Fett P, Gomes M, Souza D, Cunha R, Lara D
(2007) Caffeine and adenosine A(2a) receptor antagonists pre-
vent beta-amyloid (25-35)-induced cognitive deﬁcits in mice.
Exp Neurol 203, 241-245.
[40]
Fisone G, Borgkvist A, Usiello A (2004) Caffeine as a psy-
chomotor stimulant: mechanism of action. Cell Mol Life Sci
61, 857-872.
[41]
Daly J (2007) Caffeine analogs: biomedical impact. Cell Mol
Life Sci 64, 2153-2169.
[42]
Chong H, Lee J, Guan K (2001) Positive and negative regu-
lation of Raf kinase activity and function by phosphorylation.
EMBO J 20, 3716-3727.
[43]
Finco T, Baldwin A (1993) Kappa B site-dependent induction
of gene expression by diverse inducers of nuclear factor kappa
B requires Raf-1. J Biol Chem 268, 17676-17679.
[44]
Gilmore T (2006) Introduction to NF-kappaB: players, path-
ways, perspectives. Oncogene 25, 6680-6684.
[45]
Valerio A, Boroni F, Benarese M, Sarnico I, Ghisi V, Bres-
ciani L, Ferrario M, Borsani G, Spano P, Pizzi M (2006)
NF-kappaB pathway: a target for preventing beta-amyloid
(Abeta)-induced neuronal damage and Abeta42 production.
Eur J Neurosci 23, 1711-1720.
[46]
Horrigan L, Kelly J, ConnorT (2004) Caffeine suppress-
es TNF-alpha production
via activation
of the cyclic
AMP/protein kinase A pathway. Int Immunopharmacol 4,
1409-1417.
[47]
Al-Wadei H, Takahashi T, Schuller H (2006) Caffeine stim-
ulates the proliferation of human lung adenocarcinoma cells
and small airway epithelial cells via activation of PKA, CREB
and ERK1/2. Oncol Rep 15, 431-435.
[48]
D’Angelo G, Lee H, Weiner R (1997) cAMP-dependent pro-
tein kinase inhibits the mitogenic action of vascular endothe-
lial growth factor and ﬁbroblast growth factor in capillary en-
dothelial cells by blocking Raf activation. J Cell Biochem 67,
353-366.
[49]
Echeverria V, Burgess S, Gamble-George J, Zeitlin R, Lin
X, Cao C, Arendash GW (2009) Sorafenib inhibits nu-
clear factor kappa B, decreases inducible nitric-oxide syn-
thase and cyclooxygenase-2 expression, and restores work-
ing memory in APPswe mice. Neuroscience, doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2009.05.019.
[50]
Costa D, Cracchiolo J, Bachstetter A, Hughes T, Bales K, Paul
S, Mervis R, Arendash G, Potter H (2007) Enrichment im-
proves cognition in AD mice by amyloid-related and unrelated
mechanisms. Neurobiol Aging 28, 831-844.
[51]
Gong B, Vitolo O, Trinchese F, Liu S, Shelanski M, Arancio O
(2004) Persistent improvement in synaptic and cognitive func-
tions in an Alzheimer mouse model after rolipram treatment.
J Clin Invest 114, 1624-1634.
[52]
Hooper C, Killick R, Lovestone S (2008) The GSK3 hypoth-
esis of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 104, 1433-1439.
[53]
Twomey C, McCarthy J (2006) Presenilin-1 is an unprimed
glycogen synthase kinase-3beta substrate. FEBS Lett 580,
4015-4020.
[54]
Lucas J, Hern´andez F, G´omez-Ramos P, Mor´an M, Hen R,
Avila J (2001) Decreased nuclear beta-catenin, tau hyperphos-
phorylation and neurodegeneration in GSK-3beta conditional
transgenic mice. EMBO J 20, 27-39.
[55]
Engel T, Hern´andez F, Avila J, Lucas J (2006) Full reversal
of Alzheimer’s disease-like phenotype in a mouse model with
conditional overexpression of glycogen synthase kinase-3. J
Neurosci 26, 5083-5090.
[56]
Potter H, Wefes I, Nilsson L (2001) The inﬂammation-induced
pathological chaperones ACT and apo-E are necessary cata-
lysts of Alzheimer amyloid formation. Neurobiol Aging 22,
923-930.
[57]
Azam S, Hadi N, Khan N, Hadi S (2003) Antioxidant and
prooxidant properties of caffeine, theobromine and xanthine.
Med Sci Monit 9, BR325-330.
[58]
Paris D, Quadros A, Humphrey J, Patel N, Crescentini R,
Crawford F, Mullan M (2004) Nilvadipine antagonizes both
Abeta vasoactivity in isolated arteries, and the reduced cerebral
blood ﬂow in APPsw transgenic mice. Brain Res 999, 53-61.
[59]
Ju´arez-M´endez S, Carretero R, Mart´ınez-Tellez R, Silva-
G´omez A, Flores G (2006) Neonatal caffeine administration
causes a permanent increase in the dendritic length of pre-
frontal cortical neurons of rats. Synapse 60, 450-455.
[60]
Lee W, Anwyl R, Rowan M (1987) Caffeine inhibits post-
tetanic potentiation but does not alter long-term potentiation
in the rat hippocampal slice. Brain Res 426, 250-256.
[61]
Lu K, Wu S, Gean P (1999) Promotion of forskolin-induced
long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission by caffeine in
area CA1 of the rat hippocampus. Chin J Physiol 42, 249-253.
[62]
Mart´ın E, Bu˜no W (2003) Caffeine-mediated presynaptic
long-term potentiation in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neu-
rons. J Neurophysiol 89, 3029-3038.
[63]
Chen X, Gawryluk J, Wagener J, Ghribi O, Geiger J (2008)
Caffeine blocks disruption of blood brain barrier in a rabbit
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinﬂammation 5, 12.
[64]
Zipser B, Johanson C, Gonzalez L, Berzin T, Tavares R,
Hulette C, Vitek M, Hovanesian V, Stopa E (2007) Microvas-
cular injury and blood-brain barrier leakage in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neurobiol Aging 28, 977-986.
[65]
Ujiie M, Dickstein D, Carlow D, Jefferies W (2003) Blood-
brain barrier permeability precedes senile plaque formation in
an Alzheimer disease model. Microcirculation 10, 463-470.
