Recent Developments in Applied Microbiology and Biochemistry	
195
© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816328-3.00015-5
C H A P T E R
15
The Status of Research and 
Application of Biofertilizers and 
Biopesticides: Global Scenario
Marella Saritha, N.V.K.V. Prasad Tollamadugu
Nanotechnology Laboratory, Institute of Frontier Technology, Regional Agricultural Research 
Station, Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, Tirupati, India
O U T L I N E
15.1	 Introduction	
196
15.2	 Why to Use Bioproducts?	
196
15.3	 N Fixing Inoculants as  
Biofertilizers	
196
15.3.1	 Rhizobium	
197
15.3.2	 Azotobacter	
198
15.3.3	 Herbspirillum	
198
15.3.4	 Azospirillum	
199
15.3.5	 Acetobacter	
199
15.3.6	 Azolla	
199
15.3.7	 Blue Green Algae (Anabaena, 
Nostoc, Plectonema)	
199
15.3.8	 Mycorrhiza	
199
15.3.9	 Phosphate Solubilizing  
Bacteria	
199
15.3.10	 Potassium Solubilizing  
Bacteria	
200
15.3.11	 Bioengineered Microbes	
200
15.3.12	 Liquid Biofertilizers	
200
15.4	 Interaction Mechanism  
of Plant and Microbes	
200
15.5	 Global Market Reports of 
Bioalternatives	
201
15.6	 Insights Into the Product  
and Application in Various  
Regions	
203
15.7	 Limitations in Promotion of 
Biofertilizer and Biopesticide 
Consumption	
204
15.8	 Policies & Programs	
204
15.9	 Future Prospects	
205
15.10	 Conclusion	
206
References	
206

196	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
15.1  INTRODUCTION
Organic farming is nowadays attracting the attention of researchers and the public too with 
increased health awareness and pollution constraints. The ill effects of agrochemicals that 
resist pests may accumulate in soil, water, and air, and detrimental effects of the outbreak of 
secondary pests made it mandatory for the production of biopesticides (Al-Zaidi et al., 2011; 
Forlani et al., 2014). Biofertilizers are the biologically active products or microbial inoculants 
(one or more beneficial bacteria of fungal strains) meant for N fixing, phosphate solubilizing, 
or cellulolytic actions that can promote growth and yield by improving the availability of soil 
nutrients in its rhizosphere (Mazid et al., 2011a; Arriola et al., 2015). They are usually made 
of two microbes and a carrier material of which bacteria, blue-green algae, and arbuscular 
mycorrhiza fungi are the most commonly used biofertilizers. For microbial biopesticides, the 
best strain used is Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), and almost 90% of the biopesticides are derived 
from this. Currently, chemical fertilizers and pesticides are being replaced by biofertilizers 
and biopesticides, respectively, owing to their ease of application, eco-friendly nature, cost 
effectiveness, and nontoxicity. Demand for biopesticides comes from the increasing aware-
ness of the public towards health and ecology and also hazards in the indiscriminate use of 
synthetic chemical pesticides. However, only 1%–2% of the total crop protection market is 
occupied by bioalternatives and that too relied on Bt. Researchers all over the globe are being 
engaged in developing bioproducts that are easier to use, can overcome the ill effects of phy-
topathogens, and cover more target crops.
15.2  WHY TO USE BIOPRODUCTS?
In spite of the improved food grain production with the advent of green revolution by the use 
of inorganic fertilizers, ecological imbalance and depletion of natural resources caused a serious 
threat to the mankind. The cost of chemical fertilizers is increasing enormously with respect to 
the deteriorating petroleum-based products and feedstock, and also the energy requirement for 
producing 1 kg fertilizer is 11.2 kWh for nitrogen (N), 1.1 kWh for phosphorus (P), and 1 kWh for 
potash. Hence, organic farming became inevitable in order to overcome the limitations.
They also act as supplements to agrochemicals in the production of nutrients prevailing 
in the soil atmosphere and the eradication of pests that cause damage to crop leading to 
declined yields. Hence, the promotion of biofertilizers and biopesticides can be admissible 
through research and development only when demand is created in farmers toward their 
usage and ultimate production (Malusá and Vassilev, 2014). Biological N fixation is meant to 
convert elemental N to organic forms, which are readily available for N-fixing microbes in a 
symbiotic association with plants. These microbes are collectively known as “diazotrophs,” 
and their functions are precisely represented in Fig. 15.1.
15.3  N FIXING INOCULANTS AS BIOFERTILIZERS
The efficacy of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) over the soil-dwelling 
­bacteria helps in reducing the adverse effects of plant pathogens and enhancing crop 
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
15.3  N Fixing Inoculants as Biofertilizers	
197
­rotation by uplifting the availability of N, P, and iron (Fe). N, as a component of chlo-
rophyll and protein, is essential for photosynthesis and vegetative and reproductive 
growth and even determines yield of crop (Marek-Kozaczuk et  al., 2014). Azotobacter, 
a N-fixing bacterium, is best used as biofertilizer for plants like maize, wheat, sorghum, 
and rice, which aids in the production of plant growth-promoting metabolites; enzymes; 
and phytohormones like auxins, gibberellins, and cytokinins (Forlain et al., 1998). The use 
of Azospirillum brasilense inoculated maize seeds and also enhanced root and shoot length 
(Braccini et al., 2012) besides the increased dry weight of the plant (Puente et al., 2009). 
Farmers’ interest in the use of biofertilizers is lacking, especially in some of the North 
American parts due to price compatibility on application to commodity crops that are of 
low value. The maximum amount of N-fixing capacity of each inoculum has been graphi-
cally represented in Fig. 15.2.
15.3.1  Rhizobium
This N-fixing symbiotic bacterium belongs to the Rhizobiaceae family and can fix N at 
50–100  kg/ha in pulse crops and hence routinely recommended for all legumes except 
Parasponia, a nonlegume (Saikia and Jain, 2007). Its symbiotic association is visible in the form 
of root nodules, but stem nodules are also seen in Sesbania rostrata. These inoculants can be 
used as biofertilizers specific to the crop that are mentioned below (Table 15.1).
Solubilize
phosphates of
Fe, Ca, and Al
to available
forms
Increase
resistance to
pests &
pathogens on
plants
Improve soil
fertility by
organic
decomposition
Promote
growth by
producing
phytohormo
nes and plant
metabolites
Act as
phosphate
scavengers
of soil
Improve
nutrient
proximity to
soil and crop
yield
Fix
atmospheric
N in soil for
plant
utilization
Bioproducts
(biofertilizers &
biopesticides)
FIG. 15.1 
Functional characteristics of biofertilizers and biopesticides.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

198	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
15.3.2  Azotobacter
This is a nonsymbiotic, aerobic, and free-living bacterium and belongs to the Azotobacteriaceae 
family, but the root nodules are not visible. It fixes N at 40–200 kg/ha and can afford to 
80%–90% of N requirement of the crop. Azotobacter vinelandii, Acinetobacter beijerinckii, 
Agrionoptera insignis, and Azomonas macrocytogenes are the different species occurring in the 
rhizosphere of crops like rice, maize, sugarcane, bajra, vegetables, and plantation where an 
increase in the yield is up to 50%. These species help in inhibiting certain root pathogens by 
seed germination and plant growth as a result of the production of B vitamins and phytohor-
mones (Mazid et al., 2011b).
15.3.3  Herbspirillum
It is a N-fixing symbiont inhabiting roots of sugarcane and enhances uptake of N, K, and 
P and also promotes growth hormone (gibberellins, auxins, and kinetins) production (Khan 
et al., 2011a). In a study, researchers investigated the bioprotective effects of inoculating corn 
grown under drought conditions with two types of PGPR, Azospirillum brasilense, strain SP-7, 
and Herbaspirillum sp. The obtained results proved that these bacteria could be used to help 
plants cope with the negative effects of drought stress conditions (Curá et al., 2017).
TABLE 15.1  Rhizobial Species as Biofertilizer in Various Crops
Rhizobium Inoculant
Crop
N-Fixing Capacity (kg/ha)
Rhizobium trifoli
Rhizobium meliloti
Rhizobium phaseoli
Rhizobium japonicum
Rhizobium leguminosarum
Rhizobium lupine
Berseem
Lucerne
Green gram, black gram
Soybean
Pea, lentil
Chickpea
130
100–150
80–110
57–105
62–132
70–90
100
200
40
15
50
500
N fixing capacity (kg/ha)
Rhizobium
Azotobacter
Azospirillum
Acetobacter
Azolla
P solubilizing
FIG. 15.2 
N-fixing capability of microbial species.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
15.3  N Fixing Inoculants as Biofertilizers	
199
15.3.4  Azospirillum
It is a N-fixing microbe also called as B. polymyxa. It belongs to the Spirillaceae family 
and is beneficial for nonleguminous plants. The different species under this genus are 
Azospirillum amazonense, Azospirillum halopraeferens, and Azospirillum brasilense with a N 
fixation capacity of 20–40 kg/ha. These are significant in improving leaf area and grain 
yield and specifically used in maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and pearl millet (C4 plants) as 
they fix N on salts of organic acids like malic acid and aspartic acid (Brusamarello-Santos 
et al., 2017).
15.3.5  Acetobacter
It proves best suited for sugarcane crop as it can tolerate the high-sucrose concentration 
and can be able to fix N up to 15 kg/ha/year.
15.3.6  Azolla
It is a free-floating symbiotic fern belonging to Azollaceae and is used as green manure 
or as dual crop. The paddy yield is increased when the dry inoculums of Azolla is soaked 
in superphosphate solution and inoculated and is shown to fix N at 45–50 kg/ha. Azolla 
pinnata is the common species used as biofertilizer in paddy crop as it can quickly decom-
pose in soil and make the best availability of N. Its capacity of symbiotic association with 
blue-green algae favors rice or other crops for dual cropping or green manuring of soil 
(Ghosh, 2004).
15.3.7  Blue Green Algae (Anabaena, Nostoc, Plectonema)
These are photosynthetic N-fixing free-living organisms and improve soil aeration by 
adding growth-promoting substances including vitamin B12. They have special structures 
called heterocysts, which act as micronodules, helping in N fixation. They form symbiotic 
association with ferns, fungi, liverworts, and flowering plants but in particular with Azolla 
for fixing N.
15.3.8  Mycorrhiza
Mycorrhiza, as is known for crop infection, can also form symbiotic relationship with host 
plants in exchange of zinc (Zn) and P for carbohydrates. They establish a bridge with soil 
through their mycelia for the absorption of water and nutrients like P, K, Ca, and N and pro-
duce growth promoters like cytokinins further protecting plants from invading pathogens by 
secreting antimicrobial substances.
15.3.9  Phosphate Solubilizing Bacteria
Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Micrococcus, Aspergillus, Fusarium, etc. are the major phosphate sol-
ubilizing bacteria (PSB) in soil. They convert the nonavailable inorganic phosphate to its 
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

200	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
soluble form, thus increasing the availability of phosphorus by secreting organic acids like 
citric, oxalic, succinic, tartaric, and malic acids in the soil rhizosphere. They can increase the 
crop yield up to 200–500 kg/ha. The rhizosphere of sunflower was evidenced by the pres-
ence of phosphate-solubilizing bacterial species of Enterobacter and Burkholderia (Ambrosini 
et al., 2012).
15.3.10  Potassium Solubilizing Bacteria
Like nitrogen and phosphorus, potassium is one of the primary macronutrients that the 
plant needs to develop its biological processes. Therefore, potassium-solubilizing activity is 
an important function of rhizotrophic bacteria. Aspergillus, Bacillus, and Clostridium genera 
are efficient in solubilization mobility of K in the soil in different crops (Mohammadi and 
Sohrabi, 2012).
15.3.11  Bioengineered Microbes
These are microbes encountered with specific functional genes by means of rDNA tech-
nology. They protect the crop from pests and degrade biological wastes further enhancing 
N fixation by application of nif genes in Rhizobium meliloti.
15.3.12  Liquid Biofertilizers
These are special liquid formulation with desired microbes and their nutrients but en-
dowed with special cell protectants for resting spores/cysts to enhance shelf life and tolerate 
adverse conditions (Hegde, 2008). They can also overcome the limitations of normal (solid) 
biofertilizers attributed to their resistance to higher temperatures and ultraviolet radiation 
(Sumita et al., 2015). They have very high-enzymatic activity that is highly adoptable by farm-
ers and have ease of application like using powder sprayers, hand sprayers, and as basal ma-
nure mixed with farmyard manure. Microbial inoculants are of great interest, but the efficacy 
of microbes other than rhizobium is unpredictable.
15.4  INTERACTION MECHANISM OF PLANT AND MICROBES
Plants defend themselves from the attack of pathogens and also need strategies to take 
advantage of beneficial microbes. With increasing world population, understanding the in-
teraction between plant and microbe forms a key area of research to maintain and improve 
crop yield (Fig. 15.3). Changes in ecosystem and physical environment have great impact on 
beneficial and detrimental plant-microbe interactions. To protect themselves from the attack 
of pathogens and pests and to avoid crop loss in agriculture, plants have a sophisticated 
immune system. They also recruit beneficial microbes to their root system by boosting the 
immune responses further forming a rationale for developing sustainable strategies for dis-
ease resistance in next generation crops.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
15.5  Global Market Reports of Bioalternatives	
201
15.5  GLOBAL MARKET REPORTS OF BIOALTERNATIVES
The biopesticide market is segmented into bioherbicides, bioinsecticides, and biofungi-
cides based on the product type. With respect to ingredients, it is again divided into microbial, 
plant and biochemical-based biopesticides of which Bt-based microbial pesticides constitute 
over 50% of the market share followed by fungi, viruses, and nematodes (GBMAIF, 2017).
Production of 3000 tons/year of biopesticides is being seen globally, and this is increasing 
alarmingly. US market tops the biopesticide use with a sale of 200 products while 60 prod-
ucts in EU (Hubbard et al., 2014). The United States, Canada, and Mexico contribute to 45% 
of the biopesticide sale, and Asia occupies at least only 5% of the biopesticides sold all over 
the world (Bailey et al., 2010). Herbal substitutes of biopesticides like beshram, neem, garlic, 
triphala, and pinus kesiya are being processed and improved to increase consumption by 
farmers. Further, recombinant DNA (rDNA) technology (Fitches et al., 2004) has been de-
ployed for improving the efficacy of biopesticides. In the year 2015, many biopesticides were 
introduced in the United States, Canada, Africa, and Australia by companies like Andermatt 
Biocontrol, Koppert Biological Systems, and Certis USA. Awareness of rhizobium-based 
N2
NH3
NO2
–
NO3
–
NO4
+
Biofertilizers
Beneficial microbes in
sustainable agriculture
FIG. 15.3 
Mechanism of the interaction of plant and biofertilizers.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

202	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
fertilizers has been increasing globally especially the Unites States rather than using other 
biofertilizers that are of low-valued products. Since times are innumerable, rhizobia in par-
ticular Bradyrhizobium japonicum are being used as inoculants for soybean crops. In Canada, 
rhizobial strains are most accepted for legume cultivation, but other strains like Bacillus sub-
tilis, Bradyrhizobium japonicum, Delftia acidovorans, and Lactobacillus helveticus are also being 
commercialized.
International Plant Nutrition Institute has revealed that the use of biofertilizers in Brazil 
is about 60–70 K tons/year. In Argentina, Paraguay, Bolivia, and Uruguay of South America, 
also nearly 70% of 30 million hectares of soybean crops were inoculated with Bradyrhizobium 
sps every year and are considered to be a large soybean market. A difference of 7.5% yield 
was observed between inoculated and noninoculated crops, whereas Pseudomonas sps and 
Azospirillum brasilense are recommended for wheat and maize with an expected increase in 
yield of 4%–9%. Although countries with advanced R&D and high-end technology like Japan, 
Taiwan, and Korea are moving more forward toward biofertilizer and biopesticide produc-
tion, small-scale farmers due to literacy hurdles need to be educated on the comparative use 
of inorganic and organic constituents (FFTC, 2007).
Asian countries have opportunities for the development and commercialization of bio-
alternatives contributing to food safety and environmental concerns. In India, more than 
100,000 ha have been occupied by organic farming (Sekhar et al., 2016) supported by nearly 
100 biofertilizer producers across the country and are receiving special focus in horticul-
ture, oilseed, and medicinal plant cultivation. In China, 167 million hectares have been cul-
tivated with biofertilizers, and over 300 producers are found all over. However, inoculants 
other than rhizobium were not found to be efficient. The rhizobium biofertilizer in Japan is 
Mamezo, and in Taiwan, farmers’ economy was substantially increased (USD 27 million) 
from 1987 to 2006. Vietnam farmers have been using BioGro for rice, which resulted in 
brighter, less disease-prone, clean and stronger stems and increased grain yield. China and 
India adopt the larger use of pesticides as proposed by Biopesticides Industry Coalition of 
American (BPIA) and the European Association for International Producers of Biological 
Control Products (IBMA). Biopesticide market is emerging as is evidenced with the two 
top companies AgraQuest and Prophyta adopted by Bayer CropScience and made a sig-
nificant impact on the biopesticide business sector. Kodiak Concentrate and Serenade SOIL 
were the products released in 2014, and apart from that, Valent BioSciences had a distribu-
tion agreement with North America for a biofungicide product constituting Monsanto and 
Novozymes (GBMAIF, 2017).
Only 2.8% of the pesticide market is occupied by biopesticides in Korea, and the farmers 
adopted a method of applying a mixture of egg yolk and cooking oil (EYCO) for pest control. 
It is cheaper than the chemical pesticide and also eco-friendly. The major biofertilizer indus-
tries in Brazil are Embrafós, Instituto de Fosfato Biológico (IFB), Biofosfatos do Brasil, and 
Liderfós, and IFB is the leading producer in the country. All their products are being applied 
to beans, carrot, sugarcane, rice, maize, soybean, eucalyptus, citrus, tomatoes, cotton, and 
forage crops with the aim of lowering soil acidification, having sustainable bioavailability for 
P for commercial crops, being cost-effective and nature friendly. Biofosfatos do Brasil utilizes 
sugarcane filter cake (by-product of ethanol and/or sugar production), mixed with PR, as 
the main raw material. IFB’s research aims at new products in plant nutrition among which 
BioAtivo is the major product promoting biological N fixation by solubilizing phosphate 
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
15.6  Insights Into the Product and Application in Various Regions	
203
rock (PR). This product has a patent number PI-9401724-7 by the Instituto Nacional de 
Propriedade Intelectual (Brazilian Institute for Intellectual Property). One of the main objec-
tives is to utilize urban sewage sludge as raw material for the production of biofertilizer (Luis 
and Jesus, 2005).
15.6  INSIGHTS INTO THE PRODUCT AND APPLICATION IN 
VARIOUS REGIONS
Forty-five percent of the biopesticides sold was being used by the United States, Canada, 
and Mexico, whereas Asia is lagging behind with only 4% of the products all over the 
world (Bailey et al., 2010). The largest product segment was N fixing, which accounts 75% 
of revenue in 2014 and is encountered majorly by the regional markets of the United States 
and EU. The global pesticide market (product-incorporated protectants, nematicides, bio-
fungicides, bioherbicides, and bioinsecticides) was over USD 3.3 billion in 2017 and is 
supposed to be projected to USD 9.5 billion by 2025. North America is leading to reach 
USD 3667.5 million by 2025 followed by Europe and Asia Pacific with a rapid extension in 
the coming years. Countries of Southeast Asia especially India and China explore the use 
of biopesticide potential in fruit production (GBMAIF, 2017). The demand relies on the im-
provement of soil N yield through microbes in these regions. Fifteen percent of the global 
revenue in this year was accomplished by phosphate solubilizers as the second largest 
product segment and is expected to be growing at the fastest rate from 2015 to 2022. The 
ability of soluble bacteria to hydrolyze organic and inorganic phosphate may be responsi-
ble for the growing popularity of the product and boosting in the forecast period. The next 
segment is occupied by zinc and silicate solubilizers wherein they degrade silicates and 
aluminum silicates of the soil and enhance metabolism of plant by improving the flow of 
phosphate ions (Report, 2018).
The largest application accounting for 65% of market in 2014 was seed treatment wherein 
biofertilizer treated seeds increase the yield besides resisting bacterial and viral attacks. The 
adaptability in the method of seed treatment, harnessing atmospheric N to soil, may be 
expected for the driving demand in the forecast period. In developing countries like India, 
the demand for organic food has been expected to rise by USD 1 billion from 2014 to 2020 
(Report, 2018). Fifteen percent of the Asian Pacific market was expected to rise due to bio-
fertilizers, and China is the largest agricultural market of maize, where the organic product 
manufacturers were exempted from VAT and excise and agricultural tax. North America and 
Europe together constitute nearly 54% of the global revenue with an increasing awareness of 
the organic food and the chemical hazards (Report, 2018). “Nitragin” is a laboratory culture 
of rhizobia meant for value addition to seed with an aim to increase the yield of forage crops 
like alfalfa, sweet clover, and clover.
In India, maize occupies the third important position after rice and wheat and is known 
to be the “queen of cereals” attributing to its highest genetic yield potential. This was devel-
oped with Nitragin Gold Technology by Canada and is in use only in Canada and the United 
States. In India, the first study and commercialization on rhizobium was done in 1956 by VN 
Joshi, but the real effort to promote and popularize the product was set up under the National 
Project on Development and Use of Biofertilizers (NPDB) by the Ministry of Agriculture 
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

204	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
under the Ninth Five-Year Plan (Rana et al., 2013). The National Biofertilizer Development 
Center was developed at Ghaziabad, India, and the marketing was improved in three ways 
with the following:
−	 State governments via district level officers and workers at village level
−	 State marketing federation via cooperative bodies and farmers
−	 State agro-industry cooperation via the agro service centers
15.7  LIMITATIONS IN PROMOTION OF BIOFERTILIZER AND 
BIOPESTICIDE CONSUMPTION
1.	 Resource constraints:
•	 The lack of suitable resource constraints/unavailability of suitable strains
•	 Ignorance of manufacturer on the quality of product
•	 Nonavailability of quality resource/quality control methods
•	 Infrastructural constraints like space availability for establishment of laboratory, 
production, and storage
•	 The lack of cold storage equipment for inoculum
2.	 Market constraints:
•	 The lack of farmers’ awareness/quality assurance and constraints on marketing
•	 Financial constraints related to banks
•	 Smaller production units suffer due to less returns on sale with respect to the loan 
payment
3.	 Production constraints:
•	 The lack of research and development for quality assurance and hence limited 
production
•	 Inability to meet the seasonal demand/requirement due to shortage of skilled personnel
4.	 Field constraints:
•	 Unfavorable environmental factors like soil and climatic factors, microbial factors, and 
population
•	 No immediate visual results as that of inorganic fertilizers
•	 The lack of awareness in cropping operations and short span of sowing/plantations in 
specific locality
5.	 Technical constraints:
•	 Unauthenticated inoculum/microbes, mishandling techniques, and mutations
•	 The lack of awareness on the benefits of technology
•	 Problems in the adoption of technology due to different methods of inoculation
15.8  POLICIES & PROGRAMS
Many of the governments globally have been investing in sustainable farming pertaining 
to the ill effects of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Many policies are being made in recent 
years to promote organic farming in different countries. A research report by Global Market 
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
15.9  Future Prospects	
205
Insights has stated that the biofertilizer market share is expected to rise to USD 3 billion by 
2024 and the biopesticides market is to reach USD 6.60 billion by 2022. The bionematicide 
segment is expected to have the highest growth rate from 2017 to 2022. Highly streamlined 
product registration may be responsible that North America dominates the biopesticide 
market by 2022, and the ban of neonicotinoids makes Europe the fastest growing biope-
sticide market by 2022. In European countries, 30% of the budget has been spent toward 
green payment to farmers under the “Common Agricultural Policy” in promoting bioprod-
ucts. The Indian Government has introduced many policies and plans to uplift the market 
of bioalternatives for sustainable agriculture. A number of schemes like National Mission 
of Sustainable Development (NMSA)/Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana, Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY), National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP), and Indian 
Council of Agricultural Sciences (ICAR) have been introduced. The “National Organic 
Program” (NOP) has been implemented by the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) aim-
ing to develop standards in organically grown agricultural products and their growth in the 
forecast period.
The state and central government agencies in Taiwan encourage extensive use of 
biofertilizers especially in soybean cultivation, which could be consumed as vegeta-
ble, peanut, and red bean so as to support sustainable agriculture. The policy includes 
the application of biofertilizers involving rhizobial, P-solubilizing microbial inoculants 
so as to improve N fixation by biological means. The program insists on higher yield 
and better quality of horticultural crops by conducting awareness programs to farmers 
regarding production and application of inoculants and their benefits (Young and Chao, 
1983). Research has been taken up by Indonesian agricultural sector in response to de-
creased yield in rice due to diseases. Increasing the productivity by improved soil health 
by means of composted straw combined with consortia of biofertilizers has significantly 
increased the grain yield (Simarmata et  al., 2016). Product formulation, delivery, and 
commercialization are still at its early stage, and hence, production by natural means 
needs to be emphasized. However, biopesticides were largely regulated by the system 
adopted by chemical pesticides and so barriers to market entry by imposing higher costs 
(Kumar and Singh, 2014).
15.9  FUTURE PROSPECTS
Global demand for healthier food attributes to promoting awareness in organic farming, 
and the indiscriminate use of agrochemicals can bring out sustainable agriculture, which 
can ultimately overcome environmental pollution. Benefits of bioproducts include a high 
potential for export, less contamination, and longer shelf life; however, care should also be 
taken to select vital microbe/inoculum, which can best serve the purpose and transfer the 
technology of biofertilizer and biopesticide formulation to the industry. For this, a regula-
tory body has to be formed with the aim of focusing on the research and development and 
also marketing strategies (Safir, 1994), and the governments should come up with a policy 
for safeguarding of the ecosystem as of the US Environmental Protection Agency (Kumar 
and Singh, 2015).
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

206	
15.  The Status of Research and Application of Biofertilizers and Biopesticides: Global Scenario
15.10  CONCLUSION
The major drawback in the promotion of biopesticides is the lack of their profile. Awareness 
has to be created in farmers on the use of biofertilizers and biopesticides by making them 
part of workshops and seminars, and however, the inorganic chemical fertilizers used have 
been reduced to 30%–50%. One way of improving plant growth and yield of crop is to use a 
mixture of biofertilizers so as to enhance the benefits of synergistic effect of the components. 
However, biofertilizers with multiple strains may be avoided for compatibility issues (Khan 
et al., 2011b).
References
Al-Zaidi, A.A., Elhag, E.A., Al-Otaibi, S.H., Baig, M.B., 2011. Negative effects of pesticides on the environment and 
the farmers awareness in Saudi Arabia: a case study. J. Anim. Plant Sci. 21, 605–611.
Ambrosini, A., Beneduzi, A., Stefanski, T., Pinheiro, F.G., Vargas, L.K., Passaglia, L.M., 2012. Screening of plant 
growth promoting rhizobacteria isolated from sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.). Plant Soil 356, 245–264.
Arriola, K.G., Queiroz, O.C., Romero, J.J., Casper, D., Muniz, E., Hamie, J., Adesogan, A.T., 2015. Effect of microbial 
inoculants on the quality and aerobic stability of bermudagrass round-bale haylage. J. Dairy Sci. 98, 478–485.
Bailey, K.I., Boyetchko, S.M., Langle, T., 2010. Social and economic drivers shaping the future of biological control: 
a Canadian perspective on the factors affecting the development and use of microbial biopesticides. Biol. Control 
52, 221–229.
Braccini, A.L., Demoraes Dan, L.G., Piccinin, G.G., Albrecht, L.P., Barbosa, M.C., Ortiz, A.H.T., 2012. Seed inoculation 
with Azospirillum brasilense associated with the use of bioregulators in maize. Rev. Caatinga 25, 58–64.
Brusamarello-Santos, L.C., Gilard, F., Brulé, L., Quilleré, I., Gourion, B., Ratet, P., Maltempi de Souza, E., Lea, P.J., 
Hirel, B., 2017. Metabolic profiling of two maize (Zea mays L.) inbred lines inoculated with the nitrogen fixing 
plant-interacting bacteria Herbaspirillum seropedicae and Azospirillum brasilense. PLoS One 12. e0174576.
Curá, J.A., Franz, D.R., Filosofía, J.E., Balestrasse, K.B., Burgueño, L.E., 2017. Inoculation with Azospirillum sp. and 
Herbaspirillum sp. bacteria increases the tolerance of maize to drought stress. Microorganisms 5 (3). pii: E41.
FFTC, 2007. Appropriate use of bio-fertilizers and bio-pesticides for small-scale farmers in Asia. Annual Report.
Fitches, E., Edwards, M.G., Mee, C., Grishin, E., Gatehouse, A.M.R., et  al., 2004. Fusion proteins containing 
­insect-specific toxins as pest control agents: snowdrop lectin delivers fused insecticidal spider venom toxin to 
insect haemolymph following oral ingestion. J. Insect Physiol. 50, 61–71.
Forlain, G., Pastorelli, R., Branzoni, M., Favilli, F., 1998. Root colonization efficiency, plant growth promoting activity 
and potentially related properties in plant associated bacteria. J. Genet. Breed. 49, 343–351.
Forlani, L., Juárez, M.P., Lavarías, S., Pedrini, N., 2014. Toxicological and biochemical response of the entomopatho-
genic fungus Beauveria bassiana after exposure to deltamethrin. Pest Manag. Sci. 70, 751–756.
GBMAIF, 2017. Global Biopesticides Market Analysis and Industry Forecasts 2017–2022—A $7.62 Billion Opportunity. 
News provided by Research and Markets, Dublin, September 22, 2017 07:00 ET.
Ghosh, N., 2004. Promoting biofertilisers in Indian agriculture. Econ. Polit. Wkly. 5, 5617–5625.
Hegde, S.V., 2008. Liquid bio-fertilizers in Indian agriculture. Bio-Fertilizer News Letter, 17–22.
Hubbard, M., Hynes, R.K., Erlandson, M., Bailey, K.L., 2014. The biochemistry behind biopesticide efficacy. Sustain. 
Chem. Process. 2, 18.
Khan, T.A., Mazid, M., Mohammad, F., 2011a. Role of ascorbic acid against pathogenesis in plants. J. Stress Physiol. 
Biochem. 7, 222–234.
Khan, T.A., Mazid, M., Mohammad, F., 2011b. Ascorbic acid: an enigmatic molecule to developmental and environ-
mental stress in plant. Int. J. Appl. Biol. Pharm. Technol. 2, 468–483.
Kumar, S., Singh, A., 2014. Biopesticides for integrated crop management: environmental and regulatory aspects. 
J. Biofertil. Biopestici. 5. e121.
Kumar, S., Singh, A., 2015. Biopesticides: present status and the future prospects. J. Biofertil. Biopestici. 6, 2.
Luis, E.F.R., Jesus, C.M., 2005. Bacterial biofertilizers. In: Siddiqui, Z.A. (Ed.), PGPR: Biocontrol and Biofertilization. 
Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 143–172.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY

	
REFERENCES	
207
Malusá, E., Vassilev, N., 2014. A contribution to set a legal framework for biofertilisers. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
98, 6599–6607.
Marek-Kozaczuk, M., Wielbo, J., Pawlik, A., Skorupska, A., 2014. Nodulation competitiveness of Ensifer meliloti  
alfalfa nodule isolates and their potential for application as inoculants. Pol. J. Microbiol. 63, 375–386.
Mazid, M., Khan, T.A., Mohammad, F., 2011a. Potential of NO and H2O2 as signalling molecules in tolerance to abi-
otic stress in plants. J. Ind. Res. Technol. 1, 56–68.
Mazid, M., Khan, T.A., Mohammad, F., 2011b. Cytokinins, A classical multifaceted hormone in plant system. J. Stress 
Physiol. Biochem. 7 (4), 347–368.
Mohammadi, K., Sohrabi, Y., 2012. Bacterial biofertilizers for sustainable crop production: a review. J. Agric. Biol. Sci. 
7, 307–316.
Puente, M.L., García, J.E., Alejandro, P., 2009. Effect of the bacterial concentration of Azospirillum brasilense in the 
inoculum and its plant growth regulator compounds on crop yield of corn (Zea mays L.) in the field. World J. 
Agric. Sci. 5 (5), 604–608.
Rana, R., Ramesh, Kapoor, P., 2013. Biofertilizers and their role in agriculture. Pop. Kheti 1, 56–61.
Report, 2018. Biofertilizers Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report by Product (Nitrogen Fixing, Phosphate 
Solubilizing), by Application (Seed Treatment, Soil Treatment), and Segment Forecasts, 2012–2022. ID: 
978-1-68038-038-5.
Safir, G.R., 1994. Involvement of cropping systems, plant produced compounds and inoculum production in the 
functioning of VAM fungi. In: Pfleger, F.L., Linderman, R.G. (Eds.), Mycorrhizae and Plant Health. APS Press, St. 
Paul, MN, pp. 239–259.
Saikia, S.P., Jain, V., 2007. Biological nitrogen fixation with non-legumes: an achievable target or a dogma. Curr. Sci. 
92, 317–322.
Sekhar, M., Riotte, J., Ruiz, L., Jouquet, P., Braun, J.J., 2016. Influences of climate and agriculture on water and biogeo-
chemical cycles: Kabini critical zone observatory. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. 82, 833–846.
Simarmata, T., Hersanti, Turmuktini, T., Fitriatin, B.N., Setiawati, M.R., Purwanto, 2016. Application of bioameliorant 
and biofertilizers to increase the soil health and rice productivity. HAYATI J. Biosci. 23, 181–184.
Sumita, P., Singh, H.B., Farooqui, A., Rakshit, A., 2015. Fungal biofertilizers in Indian agriculture: perception, 
demand and promotion. J. Eco-friendly Agri. 10, 101–113.
Young, C.C., Chao, C.C., 1983. In: Legume production and application of Rhizobium in Taiwan. Proceedings, ROC-
JAPAN Seminar on Promoting Nitrogen Fixation in Agriculture, pp. 39–44.
3.  SOIL AND AGRICULTURE MICROBIOLOGY
