 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Read through your chapter carefully 
 
Remember to check that: 
 
special characters appear correctly, especially in equations 
 
Figures and Tables are correct  
 
headings and sub-headings are placed correctly 
 
Our staff will not read through your chapter in detail once you have returned it, so please make sure you have 
checked everything. Final responsibility for content lies with the author. 
 
As no revised proofs will be provided, please ensure all required corrections are indicated at this stage.  
 
2. Mark up any corrections that are required 
 
Please only correct scientific or grammatical errors in your chapter – do not rewrite sections or make 
minor cosmetic changes at this stage. 
 
Please use the annotation tools to mark up corrections on the PDF proof – further instructions can be found 
on the following page. 
 
Please do not edit the PDF directly or send a list of corrections. 
 
If any replacement figures are required, please resupply the file at the highest possible resolution. 
 
Please only supply new versions of figures if you have been requested to do so, or you need to supply a 
corrected version.  
 
Permission statements for reproduced material may have been edited to meet the different requirements of the 
copyright holders. Please do not correct the formatting of these statements.  
 
3. Make sure you have answered all author queries 
 
These are listed before the beginning of the chapter– click on the query number to jump to the relevant place 
in the text.  
 
Please put your responses in the text, not on the query page. 
 
4. Return your corrected proof to your editor(s) 
 
Please email the annotated PDF of your chapter to afarah@nutricao.ufrj.br within ONE WEEK of receipt. 
 
Please do not return the PDF to Books Production, or to the email address from which you received the 
download link. 
 
If you have any queries, please do not hesitate to contact us at booksprod@rsc.org 
Proofing your Book Chapter 
The following contains the PDF proof of your book chapter for you to review. Please follow 
the steps below to proof your chapter.  
 

 
How to Annotate your PDF Proof 
 
The Comment function can be found in the right-hand sidebar, which should appear when you open your PDF.  
Otherwise, click ‘Tools’ and then select ‘Comment’. This will make the Comment tools visible (shown below). 
 
Select the piece of text that you want to mark up, and then click on the 
relevant Tool button to add the mark up to the text.  
 
For the Insert, Replace, and Sticky Note tools, this will open up a Note in 
which you can add instructions, or the text to be replaced/inserted – 
otherwise, you can double-click on the mark-up to open this.  
 
For all tools, any instructions you’ve added will appear in the Comment 
sidebar – you can also double-click on this to change, add to or remove 
the instructions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: The location and appearance of tools may vary depending on the software you are using 
to read your proof. We recommend using Adobe Acrobat Reader DC (as shown in the 
screenshots below), which can be downloaded for free online. 
 
Replace 
Use the Replace tool to indicate text that should 
be changed.
Insert 
Use the Insert tool to provide new text. 
Delete 
Use the Delete tool to indicate text that needs 
to be removed completely.
Highlight 
Use the Highlight tool to indicate formatting 
changes to text.
Sticky Note 
Use the Sticky Note tool to respond to a query, 
or indicate a change that cannot be marked up 
using one of the tools above. 
Hints and tips 
Special characters can be pasted into 
corrections from the Character Map in your 
operating system. 
Text can be made bold and italic using shortcut 
keys Ctrl+B and Ctrl+I. 
If you have difficulty selecting all the text you 
wish to correct, try holding down the Shift key 
and using the arrow keys. 

AUTHOR QUERY FORM
Book Title: Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications 
Chapter: 4
AQ1
In Table 4.1, in the sentence beginning ‘Decaffeinated (–100%’, a value appears 
to be missing before ‘100%’. Please check this carefully and indicate any changes 
required here.
AQ2
In the sentence beginning ‘Also two other studies …’ should ‘notion’ be changed to 
‘mention’ for clarity?
AQ3
In Table 4.2, in the sentence beginning ‘metal filtered coffee, 1000 p−1d−1’, please 
check that the units have been displayed correctly and indicate any changes 
required here.
AQ4
In Table 4.2, in the sentence beginning ‘Cross-over controlled, n = 29’ in brackets 
the total number of subjects is 28. Please check this carefully and indicate any 
changes required here.
AQ5
In the sentence beginning ‘Coffee contains a large number …’ should ‘will be 
published in 2017’ be changed to ‘was published in 2017’ for clarity?
AQ6
A citation to Figure 4.1 has been added here, please check that the placement of 
this citation is suitable. If the location is not suitable, please indicate where in the 
text the citation should be inserted.
AQ7
The words ‘carcinogens,’ ‘NN-methylpyridinium’ and hydroxycinnamic’ appear to 
be spelled incorrectly in Figure 4.1. Please supply a corrected version (preferably as 
a TIF file at 600 dots per inch) with your proof corrections.
AQ8
In the sentence beginning ‘Melanoidins are a heterogenous group…’ please 
indicate which chapter in the first volume of this work should be cited to replace 
‘Chapter X’.
AQ9
In the sentence beginning ‘Lee Wattenberg, one of the pioneers…’ please indicate 
which chapter in the first volume of this work should be cited to replace ‘Chapter 
X’.
AQ10
In Figure 4.2, the hyphen after ‘no’ should be removed and e.g. should be in 
italics. Please supply a corrected version (preferably as a TIF file at 600 dots per 
inch) with your proof corrections.
AQ11
Ref. 32, 41, 67 and 120: Please provide the page (or article) number(s).
AQ12
Ref. 66: Please check whether volume number has been identified correctly.
AQ13
Please indicate where ref. 143 and 144 should be cited in the text.

Abstract
The abstract for your chapter is reproduced below for your reference. Please
note that this will not appear in the final printed version of your chapter.
Numerous studies indicate that damage of the genetic material plays a cru-
cial role in a variety of human diseases, in particular in the etiology of cancer. 
Human, animal and also in vitro studies provide evidence that coffee and 
specific constituents (e.g. chlorogenic acids, N-methylpyridinium, caffeine 
and diterpenoids) prevent DNA damage. Among the most relevant molecular 
mechanisms which have been identified so far are prevention of inflamma-
tions and of oxidative damage of the genetic material as well as protection 
against genotoxic carcinogens found in human foods (heterocyclic aromatic 
amines, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and mycotoxins). These effects are 
caused by induction of antioxidant and drug detoxifying (phase II) enzymes. 
It is possible that cancer protective properties of coffee (e.g. prevention of 
hepatocellular carcinoma) as well as other beneficial health effects (improve-
ment of male fertility and prevention of neurodegenerative disorders) are 
due to the antimutagenic properties of coffee, but further investigations are 
required to elucidate these associations.

75
 
Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications
Edited by Adriana Farah
© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
4.1  Introduction
Instability of the genetic material is a pathological condition which causes 
severe adverse health effects in humans. Damage in somatic cells is involved 
in the etiology of diseases such as cancer, atherosclerosis and neurological 
disorders and reduces the life span1,2 while damage in germ cells leads to 
infertility and heritable diseases.3 To protect humans against alterations of 
the DNA which may be caused as a consequence of cell divisions but also by 
genotoxic chemicals and radiation, scientists started already in the 1960s to 
search for DNA protective (antimutagenic) dietary constituents.4–6
This chapter describes the protective properties of coffee and its constit-
uents, which were detected in in vitro experiments with mammalian cell 
lines and bacteria, in laboratory rodents and more recently also in human 
intervention studies, as well as the mechanisms of action which lead to these 
effects.
Chapter 4
DNA Protective Properties of 
Coffee: From Cells to Humans
H. Al-Serori, T. Setayesh, F. Ferk, M. Mišík,  
M. Waldherr, A. Nersesyan and S. Knasmüller*
Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Internal Medicine I, Compre-
hensive Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
*E-mail: siegfried.knasmueller@meduniwien.ac.at
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
76
4.2  Experimental Models
In order to identify genotoxic chemicals, which are dangerous for humans, 
a variety of experimental models has been developed. The most widely used 
in vitro test systems are based on the detection of gene mutations in bacte-
ria (Ames assay with Salmonella typhimurium) and mammalian cell lines (e.g. 
HPRT assays and TK test); alterations at the chromosomal level (chromo-
somal aberrations in metaphase cells and micronuclei, MN, which are extra-
nuclear bodies that are formed as a consequence of structural and numerical 
chromosomal aberrations). They can be monitored in experiments with sta-
ble cell lines and peripheral lymphocytes but also in vivo in cells from differ-
ent organs of rodents and in lymphocytes of animals and humans which can 
be collected in intervention trials.7
One of the most widely used approaches is at present the single cell 
gel electrophoresis (SCGE) assay. It is based on the measurement of DNA 
migration in an electric field which leads to “comet” formation. These 
experiments reflect the formation of single and double strand breaks and 
also of apurinic sites.8 By use of specific protocols with lesion specific 
enzymes it is also possible to quantify the formation of oxidatively dam-
aged DNA bases.9
Not all experiments reflect the situation in humans, e.g. bacteria and cell 
lines which are used for in vitro experiments do not possess enzymes detoxi-
fying DNA reactive drugs and inactivating reactive oxygen species. Therefore, 
the predictive value of the results obtained in these experiments for effects 
in humans is limited.10
In vivo experiments with laboratory rodents are in general more reli-
able provided that the experimental conditions reflect the exposure 
situation in humans. In regard to intervention trials it is notable that 
questionnaire-based studies with parallel design are in general less reli-
able as intervention trials which can be conducted under controlled 
conditions.11
4.3  DNA Protective Properties of Coffees
Interest in the antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic properties started 
already in the 1970s. For example, Wattenberg and his co-workers demon-
strated in animal studies that coffee specific diterpenoids and green 
coffee beans protect rodents against polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAH) induced tumors12 and it became also clear that coffee brews con-
tain a variety of phenolics as well as other constituents which inactivate 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) which cause damage to DNA bases and are 
involved in numerous diseases. Also caffeine was found to interact with 
the genetic material. Its structure related to purine bases raised the ques-
tion of whether it causes alterations of the DNA due to misincorporation 
of DNA bases.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

77
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
4.3.1  In Vitro Results
As mentioned above, most in vitro findings were obtained in experiments 
with bacterial indicators and stable mammalian cells. These models are 
only partly relevant for humans, as they do not reflect induction of pro-
tective enzymes by coffee and its constituents. Furthermore, the experi-
mental conditions of these investigations do not mimic the metabolism 
of bioactive compounds which are contained in coffee brews. Therefore, 
only a few typical examples of such investigations are described in the 
present paper.
A number of earlier investigations were conducted with bacterial tester 
strains (S. typhimurium) in which induction of his+ revertants (caused by gene 
mutations) was monitored. In several experiments, induction of mutants was 
found, which could be explained as a consequence of formation of hydrogen 
peroxide.13–17 It was postulated that formation of hydrogen peroxide is due 
to the Haber–Weiss–Fenton reaction which requires presence of transition 
materials18 and it was stressed by Rinkus and Taylor19 that these experimen-
tal conditions are not relevant for humans. Apart from pro-oxidant proper-
ties of specific coffee compounds, also methylglyoxal, which is frequently 
found in coffees, was postulated to account for the bacterial mutagenicity of 
the brews.16,17,20
Notably, also protective effects against ROS generating chemicals were 
reported in some of these earlier in vitro studies, when the coffee brews were 
added in low amounts to the indicator cells (see for example Stadler et al.13).
Coffee was also investigated in a number of experiments with mamma-
lian cell lines; for example pronounced induction against radiation induced 
chromosomal damage was observed in a mouse lymphoma cell line.21 The 
same model was also used in combination experiments with chemical muta-
gens (methyl methanesulfonate, mitomycin C and N-methyl-nitro-nitro-
soguanidine). Also in these studies, clear evidence for protective effects were 
found.21,22 Notably, these chemicals are used as cytostatics; therefore it is not 
clear if these observations have any relevance for healthy humans. The find-
ings of Cavin et al.23 are definitely more relevant as they were conducted in 
vitro with primary rat liver cells. The authors found pronounced protection 
against aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), one of the most dangerous mycotoxins, which 
occurs in human foods.23
4.3.2  Result of Animal Experiments
Table 4.1 contains examples for coffee studies which were conducted with 
laboratory rodents. In 1984, a study was published by Aeschbacher et al.,24 
who found that feeding of high amounts of coffee in the diet to hamsters and 
mice does not cause formation of MN reflecting structural and chromosomal 
alterations and sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) which are formed as a con-
sequence of recombination events.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
78
Table 4.1  Animal experiments concerning the DNA protective effects of coffee.a
Coffee type/animals
Treatment
Experimental model/parameters
Results
References
Chemical carcinogens
Instant coffee (100, 250, 500, 1000, 
2500 mg kg−1 b.w.)
DMN
MN bone marrow
↔ MN
136
♂ ddy mice
Instant coffee (125, 250, 500 mg kg−1) CP
MN bone marrow
↓ MN in bone marrow cells with 
250 and 500 mg kg−1 with all 
carcinogens
137
♂ Swiss albino mice
DMBA
B[a]P
AFB1
UR
Coffee (100 mg freeze-dried brew in 
diet kg−1 b.w.)
CP
MN bone marrow (several dietary 
constituents were used as 
supplements)
↓ MN with MNNG
138
♂ Swiss albino mice
MNNG
↓ MN with UR
NEU
Mit C
UR
Coffee 1% (in rat chow)
PhIP
DNA adducts in liver, colon, pan-
creas enzyme assay
↓ liver adducts by 50%
26
Coffee 5%
♂ Fischer-344
Metal filtered (25–100%)
AFB1 
(2 mg kg−1 b.w.)
Comet assay
↓ number of GSTp+ with all three 
preparations of coffees; ↓ total 
area with metal filtered coffee
27
Paper filtered (25–100%)
GSTp+
↔GSH, GST, GR; ↑ UDPGT with 
all three coffees
Decaffeinated (–100%)
↓ % DNA damage with paper  
filtered and metal filtered
♂ Him-OFA rats
No treatment with genotoxins
Instant coffee (1.0–2.5 g kg−1 b.w.)
None
SCE (Chinese hamster)
↔ SCE
24
Instant coffee (0.5–3.0 g kg−1 b.w.)
MN bone marrow (of mice)
↔ MN
Coffee aromas (8.3–50.0 ml kg−1 b.w.)
♂ Chinese hamsters;
♂ Swiss OF-1 mice
AQ1
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

79
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
0.62% ground coffee in the diet 
group (125 mg d−1); 1.36% cof-
fee-diet (275 mg d−1) for 130 days
None
8-OHdG (urine)
↑ excretion of urinary 8-OHdG 
due to coffee diet
139
♂ Wistar rats
0.62% coffee-diet group (125 mg d−1)
None
15-isoprostane F2t (serum)
↔15-isoprostane F2t
140
1.36% coffee-diet (275 mg d−1) for  
140 days
8-OHdG (urine); GPx (serum)
↑ excretion of urinary 8-OHdG; 
GPx ↓
♂ Wistar rats
1% (w/v) instant coffee solution
None
8-OHdG; DNA repair associated  
genes; SOD; LPO levels 
(expressed as MDA)
↔ 8-OHdG
141
ICR mice
GPX1 genes changes very  
moderate (up-regulation)
↔SOD; ↔ LPO (MDA)
Decaffeinated coffee (1.5 ml rat−1)
None,
8-OHdG (hepatic)
Nine proteins were up-regulated
142
♂ Wistar rats
High fat diet
8-isoprostanes (hepatic)  
peroxiredoxin 1
Two proteins down-regulated
Glutathione S-transferase α2
These 11 proteins are specific 
coffee modulated proteins and 
have beneficial effects against 
liver damage
D-dopachrome tautomerase  
proteomics (stress proteins)
↓ DNA damage; ↓ 8-isoprostenes
aAbbreviations: AFB1, aflatoxin B1; B[a]P, benzo[a]pyrene; CP, cyclophosphamide; DMBA, 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene; DMN, dimethylnitrosamine; 
GPx, glutathione peroxidase; GR, glutathione reductase; GSH, glutathione; GST, glutathione S-transferase; LPO, lipid peroxide; MDA, malondialdehyde; 
Mit C, mitomycin C; MN, micronuclei; MNNG, N-methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine; NEU, N-nitroso-N-ethylurea; 8-OHdG, 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine; 
PhIP, 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine; SCE, sister chromatid exchange; SOD, superoxide dismutase; UDPGT, UDP-glucuronosyltransfer-
ase; UR, urethane ↑ increase, ↓ decrease, ↔ no alteration.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
80
Several studies were published by the Indian scientist Abraham who 
showed that coffee reduces the formation of chemically induced MN 
in mice.21,22,25 Among the different compounds he used also PAHs like 
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) and benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), which 
are of relevance for humans. Also two other studies which were conducted 
with chemical carcinogens deserve notion. Turesky et al.26 showed in a study 
with the heterocyclic aromatic amine PhIP (2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylim-
idazo[4,5-b]pyridine), which is found in fried meat, that coffee prevents the 
formation of DNA adducts in different organs while Ferk et al.27 reported on 
prevention of induction of DNA damage by AFB1 in the liver of rats. They also 
showed that the reduction of DNA damage is paralleled by decreased forma-
tion of preneoplastic hepatic foci (from which liver tumors originate). Other 
papers which are described in Table 4.1 were conducted with untreated ani-
mals and evidence for reduced excretion of 8-hydroxyguanosine (which is 
an indicator for oxidative DNA base) in urine was found in most of them. In 
some of these trials also alterations of other markers of oxidative stress (e.g. 
of the levels of antioxidant enzymes and of the excretion of lipid peroxidation 
products) were observed.
4.3.3  Results of Human Studies
In 1989, Chen and co-workers28 published the results of a human study with 
a parallel design, in which they found a positive association between cof-
fee consumption and the rates of chromosomal aberrations in lymphocytes. 
Coffee intake was recorded in smokers and also in non-smokers (n = 30 per 
group). Two types of consumption groups were analyzed, namely, individ-
uals who consumed fewer than four cups/day and individuals with higher 
consumption. The effects of coffee were quite moderate, nevertheless, they 
reached statistical significance. One year earlier, the same group published a 
paper29 in which the authors reported on an elevation of the rates of SCEs. It 
is notable that the experimental design of the studies from which these data 
emerged is very poor i.e. it is not clear which types of coffee were consumed 
and confounding factors such as age and alcohol intake were not taken into 
consideration. Findings which were obtained in more reliable controlled 
intervention trials are listed in Table 4.2.
In all these investigations, induction of DNA migration was monitored in 
SCGE experiments under standard conditions and after treatment of isolated 
nuclei with lesion specific enzymes (formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase, 
FPG or endonuclease III, EndoIII), which enable the detection of oxidized 
purines and pyrimidines and/or after exposure of the cells to ROS (hydro-
gen-peroxide treatment). Four of these studies were conducted with conven-
tional coffees.30–33 The fact that clear protective effects were seen with FPG 
with metal- and also with paper-filtered coffee indicates that diterpenoids 
(which are removed by paper filtration) do not account for the prevention 
of oxidative DNA damage. Also in other trials with coffee brands which 
contained elevated levels of chlorogenic acids and N-methylpyridinium, 
AQ2
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Table 4.2  Human intervention trials with coffee.a
Coffee
Design of the study
Comet assay
Remarks
References
200 ml metal filtered + 400 ml 
paper filtered coffee
Sequential
LY/TL/TM
LY: ↑ SOD, ↔ GPx
30
600 ml p−1 d−1
n = 8 ♂+♀, 5 d run in, 5 d intervention
↔ SC ↓ FPG- and 
ENDOIII-sensitive sites; 
↓ H2O2 ↓ Trp-P-2
Sampling: 0 d, 5 d
150 ml metal filtered + 450 ml 
paper filtered coffee
Sequential
LY/TL/TM
LY: ↑ SOD, ↔ GPx
31
600 ml p−1 d−1
n = 8 ♂+♀, 5 d run in, 5 d intervention
↔ SC ↓ H2O2 ↓Trp-P-2; ↓ 
FPG- and ENDOIII-sen-
sitive sites; ↑ PhIP
Sampling: 0 d, 5 d
Metal filtered coffee
Sequential
LY/TL
↔ plasma and saliva overall GST; 
↑ plasma GST-pi, ↔ plasma 
GST-α; ↔ creatinine, choles-
terol, alanine and aspartate 
amino-transferase, alkaline 
phosphatase, cholesterol
33
1000 p−1d−1
n = 7 ♂+♀, 14 d run in, 6 d intervention ↔ SC ↓ BPDE
Sampling: 0 d, 6 d
Coffee enriched with caffeoylqui-
nic acids, 10.2 mg g−1 and the 
roast product N-methylpyri-
dinium, 1.1 mg g−1
Prospective, randomized, controlled 
study with parallel design
LY/%DNA
Trigonelline in urine after coffee ↑ 8 34
750 ml d−1
n = 84 ♂ (42 coffee, 42 controls), 4 w 
washout, 4 w coffee consumption
↓ SC 1.4 after coffee 
consumption
N-methylpyridinium 0 in con-
trol, 12 mg g−1 creatinine in 
consumers
Sampling: Before and after coffee
Coffee rich in both green and 
roast bean especially in chlo-
rogenic acids and N-methyl- 
pyridinium, 750 ml d−1
n = 84 ♂ 4 w washout, 4 w coffee con-
sumption, 4 w washout
LY/%DNA
↑ 1.04 total glutathione
35
Sampling: Before and after each study 
phase
↓ 1.6 (-FPG) after coffee 
consumption
↑ 1.06 reduced glutathione
↓ 1.8 (+FPG) after coffee 
consumption
↑ 1.05 glutathione reductase
↔ oxidized glutathione 
tGSH levels inversely correlated to 
BMI values, R = −0.448
AQ3
(continued)

Table 4.2 
(continued)
Coffee
Design of the study
Comet assay
Remarks
References
Coffee with high chlorogenic 
acid content (a mix of 35% 
green and 65% roasted coffee 
water extracts, 800 ml)
Cross-over controlled 
n = 29 (13 ♂, 16 ♀)
LY/%DNA
↓ 1.2 3-NT
1 w run in, 5 d intervention, 5 w wash-
out phase, 5 d either intervention or 
restriction 
sampling: 12 d, 52 d
↓ 1.1 FPG
↓ 1.2 8-iso prostaglandin F2α
↓ 1.1 EndoIII
↔ oxLDL, ↔ MDA, ↔ SOD,
↔ H2O2
↔ GPx, ↔ GST ↔ TAC, ↔ GSH
Paper filtered coffee (800 ml)
Cross-over controlled 
n = 29 (14 ♂, 24 ♀)
LY/%DNA
↔ oxLDL, ↔ MDA, ↔ SOD
30 d run in, 5 d intervention, 5 w 
washout, 5 d either intervention or 
restriction sampling: 35 d, 75 d
↔ SC
↔ GPx, ↔ 3-NT
↓ 1.1 FPG
↔ GST ↔ TAC, ↔ GSH
↓ 1.1 EndoIII
↔ H2O2
Two blends of coffee with equal 
content of caffeine: a Special 
blend (SB) with elevated levels 
of dark roast coffee and green 
been constituents (chloro-
genic acid, N-methylpyridin-
ium) and a market blend (MB)
Prospective, double-blind randomized 
cross-over 
n = 84 (group A 24 ♂, 19 ♀; group B 22 
♂, 19 ♀)
LY/%DNA
↔ body weight
Duration: Washout 4 w, intervention 
4 w, washout 4 w, intervention 4 w, 
washout 4 w sampling: 0, 4 w, 8 w, 
12 w, 16 w, 20 w
↓ 1.6 SC (MB)
↑ serotonin (MB)
↓ 1.5 SC (SB)
↔ serotonin (SB)
↓ 1.5 FPG (MB)
↓ ghrelin transcript level (both 
types of coffee)
↓ 1.2 FPG (SB)
aAbbreviations: d, days; EndoIII, endonuclease III; FPG, formamidopyrimidine glycosylase; GPx, glutathione peroxidase; GST, glutathione-S-transferase; LY, lympho-
cytes; p, person; SC, standard conditions of the comet assay (single strand breaks, double strand breaks, alkali labile sites), superoxide dismutase; SULT, sulfotransfer-
ase; TEAC, trolox equivalent antioxidative capacity; TL, tail length; TM, tail moment; w, weeks; ↑, significant increase; ↓, significant decrease; ↔ no alteration.
AQ4
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

83
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
consistently evidence for protective effects was found. Notably, in one of 
these trials,34 pronounced reduction of DNA migration was seen also under 
standard SCGE conditions (which detect single and double strand breaks as 
well as apurinic sites), while no such effects were seen in the aforementioned 
experiments with “normal” brands.
In some of the studies, lymphocytes which were collected before and 
after coffee consumption were treated with genotoxic carcinogens, for 
example with the heterocyclic aromatic amines PhIP, 3-amino-1-methyl-5h-
pyrido[4,3-b]indole acetate (Trp-P-2) or with the B[a]P metabolite benzo(a)
pyrene diolepoxide (BPDE) and clear evidence for reduction of the effects 
caused by the two later compounds was found.
The last column of Table 4.2 describes results of measurements of addi-
tional parameters which were monitored in the coffee trials. It can be seen 
that in some of them evidence for induction of antioxidant enzymes such 
as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione S-transferase (GST)-isoen-
zymes was detected.31 Also the glutathione levels, as well as markers of pro-
tein oxidation (3-nitrotyrosine, 3-NT) and lipid peroxidation products, were 
found to be altered in individual studies.35,36
Two investigations (not listed in Table 4.2), which were performed already 
in the 1980s, concerned the urinary mutagenicity of coffee drinkers. The first 
investigation was performed with concentrated non-polar urine derived frac-
tions, which were tested in bacterial mutagenicity tests (i.e. in S. typhimurium 
strains TA98 and TA100) and consistently negative results were obtained.37 In 
the second study, organic material from the urine of coffee drinkers was frac-
tionated and tested for induction of chromosomal aberrations in Chinese 
hamster ovary (CHO) cells38 and significant positive results were detected. 
However, the effects disappeared when antioxidant enzymes were added to 
the active fractions, indicating that the effects are causally related to forma-
tion of reactive oxygen species. In this context it is notable that the authors 
found that some of the fractions contained hydrogen peroxide. Notably also 
in regard to other investigations hydrogen peroxide was detected in urine of 
coffee drinkers.38–40 This observation is of interest considering the fact that 
several investigations indicated increased risks of bladder cancer in coffee 
drinkers.41,42
4.3.4  Which Molecular Mechanisms Account for the DNA-
protective Properties of Coffee?
Several modes of action may play a role in regard to the impact of coffee on 
the integrity of the genetic material. It is known that many constituents of 
the brews are able to inactivate ROS by direct scavenging. The antioxidant 
properties which were observed in some in vitro models are likely to be due 
to this mode of action. In this context, it is notable that it is known that phe-
nolic acids, tannins and Maillard products, which are contained in coffee 
brews in relatively large amounts, are able to inactivate oxygen radicals via 
this mechanism (for details see below).
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
84
Another indirect mode of action is the activation of nuclear factor E2-related 
factor 2 (Nrf2). This protein controls the transcription of detoxifying phase II 
enzymes, including specific GSTs and of several antioxidant enzymes.43 It was 
found in experiments with cultured cells44–46 and also in laboratory animals47 
that coffee activates Nrf2 and alters the expression of genes which are regu-
lated by this factor. Also in recent human trials which were conducted with a 
coffee brand containing elevated levels of chlorogenic acid as well as N-meth-
ylpyridinium, increased transcription of Nrf2 was detected in the lympho-
cytes of the participants after continuous consumption over four weeks.48,49 
In parallel, also elevated transcription of genes encoding for several antiox-
idant enzymes was observed in the blood of the participants. These effects 
and also the activation of Nrf2 were only significant when the participants 
consumed a polyphenolics-poor diet over a period of four weeks before the 
coffee intervention was started. It is unclear at present if these effects are 
also caused by consumption of “normal” (unsupplemented) blends which 
are currently marketed, therefore it is not known if these highly interesting 
observations are also relevant for consumers who drink regular coffee brews.
4.4  What are the Active Principles of Coffee?
Coffee contains a large number of volatile and non-volatile compounds which 
are described in detail in the IARC monograph Vol. 5150 (an updated version 
will be published in 2017). Only a few groups of chemicals which are found 
in larger amounts in the brews have been studied in regard to their biological 
activities. The most important constituents and their properties which may 
be causally related to the DNA-protective activities of coffee are described in 
the following paragraphs (Figure 4.1). It is notable that all these compounds 
have not been tested in humans so far. Therefore, evidence for their effects 
is at present restricted to data which come from in vitro experiments with 
mammalian cells and to results from animal studies. One of the problems in 
regard to the extrapolation of these findings to humans is that in many cases 
relatively high concentrations were used which exceed the exposure levels in 
humans by far.
4.4.1  Caffeine
Already in the 1970s, hundreds of studies were available which indicated 
that methylxanthine causes chromosomal damage.51 However, these effects 
were only seen with unphysiologically high concentrations in in vitro experi-
ments. In animal studies, consistently no adverse effects were detected with 
the alkaloid itself but in some studies with high doses (≥50 mg kg−1) evidence 
for co-mutagenic effects were found. These results were reported from com-
bined treatment studies with other genotoxins, for example in experiments 
with methotrexate, mitomycin C and cyclophosphamide.52,53 On the con-
trary, protective effects were found in studies in which low caffeine doses 
AQ5
AQ6
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

85
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
were given to rodents, for example in trials with γ-radiation, DMBA, B[a]P 
and procarbazine.25,54 Also in in vitro experiments, evidence for protective 
effects against different chemical carcinogens were observed with low con-
centrations which resemble those found in the blood of coffee drinkers. For 
example, pronounced reduction of MN rates was seen in experiments with 
the cooked food mutagen 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (IQ) in 
human hepatoma cells,55 also in studies with AFB1, evidence for antimuta-
genic effects was found.56–58 In this context, it is notable that stronger pro-
tective effects against DNA damage caused by the mycotoxin were detected in 
animal experiments with coffee brews which had high caffeine levels.27 The 
antigenotoxic properties of alkaloids may be due to interactions with error 
DNA repair systems.59
Another relevant mode of action by which the methylxanthine may protect 
humans against DNA damage is the inactivation of ROS, but evidence for 
such effects is at present confined to results which come from in vitro exper-
iments.60 Indirect effects of caffeine which may lead to hepatoprotective 
effects and, as a consequence, also to reduction of DNA damage in fibrotic 
and cirrhotic animals are discussed in the following chapter. Results which 
concerned the induction of Nrf2 by caffeine are controversial.49,61 It was 
found in a recent study in a fibrosis model in rats that oral administration of 
caffeine leads to activation of this transcription factor.62
Figure 4.1  Molecular mechanisms which account for the protective effects of 
coffee.
AQ7
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
86
4.4.2  Chlorogenic Acids
Also chlorogenic acids, which are esters derived from hydroxycinnamic acids 
(i.e. ferulic acid and caffeic acid), have been studied in in vitro and in ani-
mal experiments. Most investigations concerned their antioxidant proper-
ties which were investigated mainly with biochemical methods and only a 
few studies were performed which concerned prevention of DNA damage. 
For example, significant reduction of formation of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine 
(8-OHdG) was detected in a rat carcinogenesis model with 4-nitroquinoline 
1-oxide (4NQO);63 with gallic acid a significant decline of comet formation 
was seen in radiation exposed mice.64
It is notable that caffeic acid, the major primary metabolite of chlorogenic 
acids, was found to cause papillomas and carcinomas in the forestomach, as 
well as alveolar type II cell tumors and renal cell adenomas in mice.65 Also 
in rats, evidence for induction of forestomach tumors was found after two 
years of feeding while studies with shorter durations showed no such effect. 
These observations stimulated further genotoxicity studies with this com-
pound.66,67 In most standard routine test procedures negative results were 
obtained; in only a few papers positive findings were reported, for example 
in older investigations with CHO cells.68 No positive results were detected 
in experiments with human derived liver cells which reflect the metabolism 
of xenobiotics in humans better than models in which exogenous enzyme 
homogenates are used;69 also in experiments with laboratory rodents consis-
tently negative findings were obtained.70
Coffee brews contain a variety of chlorogenic acids which are also found in 
green beans. In dark roasted brands the levels are in the range between 25 and 
75 mg 100 g−1; highest levels are found in low- and medium-roasted coffees.71
The concentrations of these phenolic compounds decrease during the 
roasting process. Several in vitro investigations showed that various chloro-
genic acids act as pro-oxidants at high concentrations,72–75 while with doses 
which are found in the blood of coffee drinkers (2–5 µM) antioxidant proper-
ties were detected.76–78
Evidence for antioxidant effects in vivo are restricted to results from a few 
studies. For example, protective effects were found in ischemia induced 
mice; furthermore, it is notable that in animals with chemically induced 
colitis, parameters were decreased which are indicative for oxidative stress. 
However, it is notable that in none of these studies DNA stability parameters 
were monitored.79,80
Apart from direct scavenging effects, also interactions with transcription 
factors may account for the ROS-protective properties of the phenolic acids. 
For example, inhibition of NFκB was observed in experiments with rats, but 
the doses which were used in these experiments were 10–30-fold higher than 
the uptake levels in humans. Also under in vitro conditions inhibition of this 
transcription factor was detected.81,82 Only a few studies concerned the acti-
vation of Nrf2 by chlorogenic acids; for example Feng et al. detected such 
effects in JB6 cells.83
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

87
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
4.4.3  Melanoidins
Melanoidins are a heterogenous group of nitrogen containing polymers 
which are formed during the last step of the Maillard reaction and include 
in their backbone different constituents of green beans (i.e. carbohydrates, 
chlorogenic acids)60 (see Chapter X for details). It was postulated on the basis 
of in vitro measurements that these products may be even more important 
contributors to the antioxidant capacity of coffee brews than chlorogenic 
acids,84 but no data from human and animal studies are available which sup-
port this hypothesis.
The melanoidin content of coffee beans accounts for up to 25% of the 
dry matter; apart from non-volatile representatives85–89 also volatile small 
organic heterocyclic compounds which belong to this group were shown to 
possess antioxidant properties.90
It is notable that all these effects were found in in vitro models which 
enable the detection of inactivation of ROS; but no data concerning the 
inhibition of mutagenic effects in rodents have been published accord-
ing to our knowledge with coffee derived compounds. Results which were 
obtained with products which were formed in model reactions in bacterial 
mutagenicity assays indicate that these melanoidins prevent induction of 
ROS-induced gene mutations; however, in some of them the reaction prod-
ucts caused mutagenic effects per se at increased dose levels.91,92 Apart from 
direct scavenging effects, also activation of the transcription factors Nrf2 
and NF-κB were found in experiments with mammalian cells.93,94 The later 
observation was seen in macrophages with a model reaction mix and also 
with native coffee; the authors explain their results, which indicate that 
Maillard reaction products as well as the coffee brew cause inflammative 
reactions associated with oxidative stress (which may lead to instability of 
the genetic material), by formation of hydrogen peroxide. In this context 
it is notable that the formation of Maillard reaction products depends on 
the roasting conditions; therefore, strong differences are found in different 
brands and products.
4.4.4  N-methylpyridinium
The compound is a Maillard reaction product which is formed from the alka-
loid trigonelline during the roasting process.95 According to our knowledge, 
no data concerning the DNA protective effects of this compound have been 
published so far, but increased levels were present in newly developed cof-
fee brands which have been tested in human studies recently (see above). 
Furthermore, Somoza et al.96 found in an activity guided study that it is a 
potent inducer of GST in human derived colon cells. Subsequent animal 
experiments confirmed this observation, i.e. a strong increase of the activ-
ity of this enzyme, which catalyzes the detoxification of numerous genotoxic 
carcinogens, was observed in the liver. In addition, also increased levels 
of glucuronosyltransferase (UGT), which is an important xenobiotic drug 
AQ8
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
88
metabolizing enzyme, was observed in the same study. Furthermore, a pro-
nounced increase of the antioxidant activity of plasma was detected in these 
experiments, indicating that N-methylpyridinium may contribute substan-
tially to the ROS protective properties of coffee.
4.4.5  Coffee Specific Diterpenoids
Lee Wattenberg, one of the pioneers of chemoprevention, and his co-work-
ers studied already in the 1980s the cancer protective effects of a lipid 
fraction from coffee whose main constituents were two diterpenoids, 
namely cafestol and kahweol12 (see Chapter X). They found pronounced 
protective effects against induction of tumors by PAHs in rodents.97,98 
Subsequently, Christophe Cavin from the Nestlé Research Center in Lau-
sanne and Wolfgang Huber at the Institute of Cancer Research in Vienna 
published a number of articles which concern the chemoprotective prop-
erties of these compounds. Cavin showed in a number of in vitro experi-
ments and partly also in animal studies that these lipids protect against 
DNA damage caused by genotoxic carcinogens such as AFB1, PhIP, DMBA 
and B[a]P.99,100 Also in human liver derived cells, evidence for protective 
effects were detected in micronucleus experiments with mixtures of the 
lipids101 and animal experiments showed that these compounds prevent 
formation of DNA adducts by “the cooked food mutagen” PhIP in the 
colon, which is one of the main target organs for tumor induction of this 
heterocyclic aromatic amine.102
The anti-carcinogenic properties of cafestol and kahweol are most likely 
due to interactions with enzymes which are involved in the metabolism of 
genotoxins. It was repeatedly reported that these lipids cause induction of 
detoxifying enzymes such as glutathione S-transferase and UGT and inhibit 
on the other hand the activities of drug activating P450 iso-enzymes. Fur-
thermore, also inhibition of sulfotransferases and N-acetyl-transferases was 
described;103 also these later enzymes are involved in the metabolic con-
version of genotoxic carcinogens in DNA reactive metabolites. Other mech-
anisms which may lead to DNA protection are antioxidant properties and 
induction of O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyl transferase.103 Lee and Jeung 
published an interesting paper in which they showed that C + K reduce ROS 
formation and inhibit lipid peroxidation and inactivate superoxide radicals 
in vitro; furthermore, they also found evidence for inhibition of formation 
of 8-oxo-2ʹ-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG) in a mouse cell line.104 The authors 
explain these findings by suppression of COX2 and iNOS and inhibition 
NFκB; these effects were detected in in vitro experiments.105,106 Evidence 
for induction of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (O6-MGMT) was 
reported. in experiments with rats. This enzyme is involved in the removal of 
the pro-carcinogenic DNA-lesion O6-alkylguanine which is caused by alkylat-
ing agents.107
Despite the fact that numerous studies have been published which con-
cern the DNA protective properties of cafestol and kahweol it is unlikely 
AQ9
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

89
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
that these findings are relevant for humans. According to our knowledge, 
the serum levels of these lipids in humans are not known at present and 
most in vitro experiments were conducted under conditions with high con-
centrations which are probably not relevant for humans. The results of ani-
mal studies are also not relevant for humans as the doses which were used 
correspond to consumption of more than 10 liters of coffee per person per 
day. As described above, evidence for antioxidant effects of coffee consump-
tion were obtained in human studies also with paper filtered coffees which 
contain only minimal amounts of the lipids in contrast to metal filtered 
and Turkish brews. Notably, also in animal studies with AFB1 no signifi-
cant differences were seen between the effects of paper filtered and metal 
filtered brews.27
In this context it is also notable that it is known that cafestol and kahweol 
cause hyperlipidemia in rodents.108 Therefore, it is probably not a fruitful 
strategy to develop coffee brands which contain increased levels of these lip-
ids to improve their chemoprotective properties.
4.5  Impact of Coffee Consumption on Diseases 
Which Are Causally Related to DNA Damage
As mentioned in the introduction, damage of genetic material is involved in 
the etiology of a variety of human diseases such as cancer, neurodegenerative 
disorders, infertility and accelerated ageing (see Figure 4.2). Therefore, it is 
an interesting question whether coffee consumption is associated with ben-
eficial health effects. Indeed, epidemiological studies, as well as laboratory 
Figure 4.2  Impact of coffee consumption on diseases which are associated with 
genetic instability. Arrows indicate an increase or a decrease of the 
risks.
AQ10
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
90
experiments, indicate that coffee consumption correlates inversely with the 
incidence of this number of diseases and increases the life span. However, it 
is notable that, apart from prevention of DNA damage, also other molecular 
mechanisms may account for these effects and that no systematic studies 
have been conducted so far aimed at elucidating the causal relationships 
between the interactions of coffee with DNA and the aforementioned health 
effects.
4.5.1  Cancer
The associations between coffee consumption and cancer have been studied 
intensely in numerous human studies. For a comprehensive review see Knas-
muller et al.109
The most pronounced protective effects were found in regard to preven-
tion of liver cancer. A meta-analysis of 16 studies indicated that consump-
tion of one cup per day leads to reduction of the overall risk by 20%.110 
The assumption of a relation between coffee intake and reduced incidence 
of hepatocellular cancer is also supported by observations which show 
that coffee prevents fibrosis and cirrhosis, which are diseases associated 
with increased risks for liver cancer.111 However, it is unclear if antioxidant 
properties of the brew and prevention of DNA damage are involved in these 
associations. In the case of AFB1 induced cancer, this is highly likely as it 
was found in animal studies that different types of coffee prevent induction 
of DNA damage in rats.27
The prevention of fibrosis may be due to mechanisms which are not directly 
related to DNA damage. It has been shown in in vitro experiments that caf-
feine inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which is required for 
the synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins.112 However, this hypothesis is 
not fully confirmed and it is likely that constituents of coffee other than the 
methylxanthine may be involved. Epidemiological data indicate that no, or 
only moderate, hepatoprotective effects occur when caffeine is consumed via 
other beverages.113
Another interesting association concerns the relation between coffee intake 
and the incidence of bladder cancer. The evaluation of case control studies 
(in total 23) indicates a significant positive correlation.114 Furthermore, also 
in cohort studies a tendency for such an association was found but the over-
all effect did not reach significance.115 We mention this phenomenon, as it 
may be due to induction of DNA damage in the urothelium. As mentioned 
above, experiments with urine samples of coffee drinkers indicate that they 
possess mutagenic activity due to ROS formation. In this context it is nota-
ble that several studies reported the presence of hydrogen peroxide in urine 
samples of coffee drinkers.38–40,116
Notably, evidence is increasing that coffee intake may also be associ-
ated with reduction of the risks for other forms of cancer, for example with 
postmenopausal breast cancer, cancer of the endometrium and advanced 
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

91
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
prostate cancer and it was also reported that it increases the prognosis for 
breast and prostate survivors.117
4.5.2  Neurodegenerative Disorders
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are among the most widespread 
neurodegenerative disorders and evidence is accumulating that DNA dam-
age plays a role in their etiology.118–120
At present, evidence is quite firm that coffee intake is inversely related with 
the incidence of Parkinson's disease.121 A meta-analysis was conducted by 
Hernan et al.121 (44 case–control and 4 cohort studies), who found that coffee 
drinking reduced by 25% the overall risks of Parkinson's disease incidence. 
Apart from prevention of DNA damage, the main mechanisms seem to be 
A(1) receptor blocking by caffeine and/or alterations of the gut microflora.122
The associations between coffee intake and Parkinson's disease are less 
firm. Barranco Quintana et al.123 evaluated the results of two cohort and two 
case–control studies and found a relative risk of 0.7 in coffee drinkers. One 
of the mechanisms which may play a role is the increase of granulocyte- 
colony stimulating factor (which improves the disease)124,125 by caffeine and 
unknown constituents of the brew.126
Recent findings describe also positive effects in regard to prevention of 
dementia and cognitive impairment,127–129 but the molecular mechanisms 
which account for these beneficial effects are largely unclear. Notably, none 
of the animal studies which have been published so far concerned the 
impact of coffee and its constituents on DNA stability of the central ner-
vous system.
4.5.3  Fertility
The information concerning the impact of coffee intake on sperm quality 
parameters is conflicting (for details see Ramlau-Hansen et al.130), but at least 
in some of the studies evidence for positive effects in regard to sperm motil-
ity was found.131–133 On the contrary, maternal consumption may lead to a 
decrease of the semen quality in male offspring.130
We mentioned these findings in the context with genotoxic properties of 
coffee as impaired fertility was often found to be associated with genetic 
damage in germ cells.
4.5.4  Impact of Coffee Consumption on Mortality
The impact of coffee consumption on the total mortality rates has been 
investigated in a number of studies. In 11 older investigations either no or 
only moderate inverse effects were observed (for details see Freedman et 
al.134). The quality of these investigations varies strongly; in many of them 
no attempts were made to analyze dose response relationships and they 
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
92
did not study mortality rates in specific subgroups. A high-quality study 
was published in 2012 by Freedman et al.134 The authors investigated the 
impact of coffee consumption on total and cancer specific mortality in 
229 119 men and 173 141 women, in the frame of the National Institute 
of Health-AARP Diet and Health study (follow-up between 1995 and 2008, 
33 731 deaths in men and 18 784 deaths in women). The authors found a 
clearly reduced hazard ratio of 0.90 for consumption of more than six cups 
per day in men, the corresponding value for women is 0.86 and a signifi-
cant trend was detected in both sexes. Furthermore, clear inverse associa-
tions were detected in different subgroups in regard to deaths due to heart 
and respiratory diseases, stroke, injuries, diabetes and infections. These 
observations are in partial agreement with the findings of another large 
US study (Iowa Women's Health Study), which was conducted with 41 836 
postmenopausal women. Again a clear association was detected between 
deaths due to cardiovascular disease; other relevant factors were inflamma-
tory (non-infectious) diseases.135
4.6  Conclusions and Knowledge Gaps
The evaluation of the currently available scientific literature shows that 
coffee causes in humans prevention of oxidative DNA damage. Further-
more, some studies indicate that it protects against induction of genomic 
instability by genotoxic carcinogens such as PAHs and AFB1. These later 
findings are mainly based on results from animal experiments. Recent 
publications report that coffee also has an impact on the activation of the 
transcription factor Nrf2, which controls genes encoding for antioxidant 
and phase II enzymes, which inactivate radicals and DNA reactive metab-
olites of procarcinogens. Evidence for induction of such enzymes was 
observed in experiments with rodents and also in human intervention 
trials, but proof for the activation of Nrf2 itself is in humans restricted 
to trials with a brand which contained elevated levels of chlorogenic acid 
and N-methylpyridinium.
It is not known at present which constituents of coffee account for its 
protective effects; the most promising ones are chlorogenic acids, N-meth-
ylpyridinium and caffeine. Coffee specific diterpenoids were only tested at 
high dose levels in vitro and in animal studies which are not reached after 
consumption of unfiltered coffees (in filtered brews the major part – diter-
penoids – is removed by the filtration process).
Epidemiological studies show that coffee intake is inversely related with 
the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, diabetes type II and 
other diseases in which DNA damage may play a causal role.
It is assumed that instability of the genetic material plays a key role in the 
etiology of all these disorders. Therefore it is possible that DNA protective 
properties of coffees may account for these beneficial health effects. How-
ever, systematic experiments to prove the relationship with these positive 
effects and the improvement of the genetic stability by coffee and its compo-
nents are still lacking and should be performed in the future.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

93
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
Abbreviations
AFB1	
Aflatoxin B1
B[a]P	
Benzo[a]pyrene
BPDE	
Benzo[a]pyrene diolepoxide
CHO	
Chinese hamster ovary
COX2	
Cyclooxygenase-2
DMBA	
7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
GPx	
Glutathione peroxidase
GST	
Glutathione S-transferase isoenzymes
HPRT	
Hypoxanthine phosphorybosyl transferase
IQ	
2-Amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline
MN	
Micronucleus
MRPs	
Maillard reaction products
Nrf2	
Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2
4NQO	
4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide
3-NT	
3-Nitrotyrosine
8-OHdG	
8-Hydroxydeoxyguanosine
O6-MGMT  O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase
PAH	
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
PhIP	
2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine
ROS	
Reactive oxygen species
SCE	
Sister chromatid exchanges
SOD	
Superoxide dismutase
TK test	
Thymidine kinase test
Trp-P-2	
3-Amino-1-methyl-5h-pyrido[4,3-b]indole acetate
UGT	
Glucuronosyltransferase
References
	
1.	 D. Q. Li, Y. Yang and R. Kumar, MTA family of proteins in DNA dam-
age response: mechanistic insights and potential applications, Cancer 
Metastasis Rev., 2014, 33(4), 993–1000.
	
2.	 J. H. Hoeijmakers, DNA damage, aging, and cancer, N. Engl. J. Med., 
2009, 361(15), 1475–1485.
	
3.	 E. Tahmasbpour, D. Balasubramanian and A. Agarwal, A multi-faceted 
approach to understanding male infertility: gene mutations, molecular 
defects and assisted reproductive techniques (ART), J. Assisted Reprod. 
Genet., 2014, 31(9), 1115–1137.
	
4.	 B. Stavric, Antimutagens and anticarcinogens in foods, Food Chem. Tox-
icol., 1994, 32(1), 79–90.
	
5.	 N. Nashed, Evaluation of a possible role for antimutagens, antiterato-
gens, and anticarcinogens in reducing environmental health hazards, 
Environ. Health Perspect., 1976, 14, 193–200.
	
6.	 Chemoprevention of Cancer and DNA Damage by Dietary Factors, ed. S. 
Knasmuller, D. DeMarini, I. Johnson and C. Gerhauser, Wiley-VCH 
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2009.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
94
	
7.	 R. A. Mateuca, I. Decordier and M. Kirsch-Volders, Cytogenetic meth-
ods in human biomonitoring: principles and uses, Methods Mol. Biol., 
2012, 817, 305–334.
	
8.	 R. R. Tice, E. Agurell, D. Anderson, B. Burlinson, A. Hartmann and H. 
Kobayashi, et al. Single cell gel/comet assay: guidelines for in vitro and 
in vivo genetic toxicology testing, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 2000, 35(3), 
206–221.
	
9.	 A. R. Collins, The use of bacterial repair endonucleases in the comet 
assay, Methods Mol. Biol., 2011, 691, 137–147.
	 10.	 A. Nersesyan, M. Mišík, S. Knasmüller. Methods Used for the Detection 
of Antimutagens: An Overview, ed. S. Knasmuller, D. DeMarini, I. John-
son and C. Gerhauser, in Chemoprevention of Cancer and DNA Damage by 
Dietary Factors, Weinheim, Wiley, 2009.
	 11.	 A. Nersesyan, C. Hoelzl, F. Ferk, M. Misik, S. Knasmuller. Comet assays 
in dietary intervention trials, in The Comet Assay in Toxicology, ed. 
A. Dhawan and D. Anderson, Royal Society of Chemistry, 2009, pp. 
267–296.
	 12.	 L. W. Wattenberg, Inhibition of neoplasia by minor dietary constitu-
ents, Cancer Res., 1983, 43(5 Suppl), 2448s–2453s.
	 13.	 R. H. Stadler, R. J. Turesky, O. Muller, J. Markovic and P. M. Leong-­
Morgenthaler, The inhibitory effects of coffee on radical-mediated 
oxidation and mutagenicity, Mutat. Res., 1994, 308(2), 177–190.
	 14.	 B. S. Shane, A. M. Troxclair, D. J. McMillin and C. B. Henry, Comparative 
mutagenicity of nine brands of coffee to Salmonella typhimurium TA100, 
TA102, and TA104, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 1988, 11(2), 195–206.
	 15.	 M. Nagao, Y. Fujita, K. Wakabayashi, H. Nukaya, T. Kosuge and T. 
Sugimura, Mutagens in coffee and other beverages, Environ. Health Per-
spect., 1986, 67, 89–91.
	 16.	 Y. Fujita, K. Wakabayashi, M. Nagao and T. Sugimura, Implication of 
hydrogen peroxide in the mutagenicity of coffee, Mutat. Res., 1985, 
144(4), 227–230.
	 17.	 Y. Fujita, K. Wakabayashi, M. Nagao and T. Sugimura, Characteristics 
of major mutagenicity of instant coffee, Mutat. Res., 1985, 142(4), 
145–148.
	 18.	 M. Akagawa, T. Shigemitsu and K. Suyama, Production of hydrogen 
peroxide by polyphenols and polyphenol-rich beverages under quasi-­
physiological conditions, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 2003, 67(12), 
2632–2640.
	 19.	 S. J. Rinkus and R. T. Taylor, Analysis of hydrogen peroxide in freshly 
prepared coffees, Food Chem. Toxicol., 1990, 28(5), 323–331.
	 20.	 U. Friederich, D. Hann, S. Albertini, C. Schlatter and F. E. Wurgler, 
Mutagenicity studies on coffee. The influence of different factors on 
the mutagenic activity in the Salmonella/mammalian microsome assay, 
Mutat. Res., 1985, 156(1–2), 39–52.
	 21.	 S. K. Abraham, V. Vukicevic and H. Stopper, Coffee-mediated protec-
tive effects against directly acting genotoxins and gamma-radiation in 
mouse lymphoma cells, Cell Biol. Toxicol., 2004, 20(2), 121–132.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

95
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
	 22.	 S. K. Abraham and H. Stopper, Anti-genotoxicity of coffee against 
N-methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine in mouse lymphoma cells, Mutat. 
Res., 2004, 561(1–2), 23–33.
	 23.	 C. Cavin, M. Marin-Kuan, S. Langouet, C. Bezencon, G. Guignard and C. 
Verguet, et al. Induction of Nrf2-mediated cellular defenses and alter-
ation of phase I activities as mechanisms of chemoprotective effects of 
coffee in the liver, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2008, 46(4), 1239–1248.
	 24.	 H. U. Aeschbacher, H. Meier, E. Ruch and H. P. Wurzner, Investigation 
of coffee in sister chromatid exchange and micronucleus tests in vivo, 
Food Chem. Toxicol., 1984, 22(10), 803–807.
	 25.	 S. K. Abraham and S. P. Singh, Anti-genotoxicity and glutathione 
S-transferase activity in mice pretreated with caffeinated and decaffein-
ated coffee, Food Chem. Toxicol., 1999, 37(7), 733–739.
	 26.	 R. J. Turesky, J. Richoz, A. Constable, K. D. Curtis, K. H. Dingley and K. 
W. Turteltaub, The effects of coffee on enzymes involved in metabolism 
of the dietary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyr-
idine in rats, Chem.-Biol. Interact., 2003, 145(3), 251–265.
	 27.	 F. Ferk, W. W. Huber, B. Grasl-Kraupp, K. Speer, S. Buchmann and R. 
Bohacek, et al. Protective effects of coffee against induction of DNA 
damage and pre-neoplastic foci by aflatoxin B(1), Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 
2014, 58(2), 229–238.
	 28.	 A. T. Chen, J. A. Reidy, J. L. Annest, T. K. Welty and H. G. Zhou, Increased 
chromosome fragility as a consequence of blood folate levels, smoking 
status, and coffee consumption, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 1989, 13(4), 
319–324.
	 29.	 J. A. Reidy, J. L. Annest, A. T. Chen and T. K. Welty, Increased sister chro-
matid exchange associated with smoking and coffee consumption, 
Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 1988, 12(3), 311–318.
	 30.	 J. Bichler, Protective Effects of Coffee towards Oxigen Radicals and Hetero-
cyclic Amines, Vienna, Austria, 2005, p. 91.
	 31.	 J. Bichler, C. Cavin, T. Simic, A. Chakraborty, F. Ferk and C. Hoelzl, et 
al. Coffee consumption protects human lymphocytes against oxidative 
and 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole acetate (Trp-P-2) induced 
DNA-damage: results of an experimental study with human volunteers, 
Food Chem. Toxicol., 2007, 45(8), 1428–1436.
	 32.	 M. Misik, C. Hoelzl, K. H. Wagner, C. Cavin, B. Moser and M. Kundi, et 
al. Impact of paper filtered coffee on oxidative DNA-damage: results of 
a clinical trial, Mutat. Res., 2010, .
	 33.	 H. Steinkellner, C. Hoelzl, M. Uhl, C. Cavin, G. Haidinger and A. Gsur, et 
al. Coffee consumption induces GSTP in plasma and protects lympho-
cytes against (+/−)-anti-benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-epoxide 
induced DNA-damage: results of controlled human intervention trials, 
Mutat. Res., 2005, 591(1–2), 264–275.
	 34.	 T. Bakuradze, R. Lang, T. Hofmann, G. Eisenbrand, D. Schipp and J. 
Galan, et al. Consumption of a dark roast coffee decreases the level of 
spontaneous DNA strand breaks: a randomized controlled trial, Eur. J. 
Nutr., 2015, 54(1), 149–156.
AQ11
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
96
	 35.	 T. Bakuradze, N. Boehm, C. Janzowski, R. Lang, T. Hofmann and J. P. 
Stockis, et al. Antioxidant-rich coffee reduces DNA damage, elevates 
glutathione status and contributes to weight control: results from an 
intervention study, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2011, 55(5), 793–797.
	 36.	 C. Hoelzl, S. Knasmuller, K. H. Wagner, L. Elbling, W. Huber and N. 
Kager, et al. Instant coffee with high chlorogenic acid levels protects 
humans against oxidative damage of macromolecules, Mol. Nutr. Food 
Res., 2010, 54(12), 1722–1733.
	 37.	 H. U. Aeschbacher and C. Chappuis, Non-mutagenicity of urine from 
coffee drinkers compared with that from cigarette smokers, Mutat. Res., 
1981, 89(2), 161–177.
	 38.	 B. P. Dunn and J. R. Curtis, Clastogenic agents in the urine of coffee 
drinkers and cigarette smokers, Mutat. Res., 1985, 147(4), 179–188.
	 39.	 K. Hiramoto, T. Kida and K. Kikugawa, Increased urinary hydrogen per-
oxide levels caused by coffee drinking, Biol. Pharm. Bull., 2002, 25(11), 
1467–1471.
	 40.	 L. H. Long and B. Halliwell, Coffee drinking increases levels of urinary 
hydrogen peroxide detected in healthy human volunteers, Free Radical 
Res., 2000, 32(5), 463–467.
	 41.	 K. Sugiyama, Y. Sugawara, Y. Tomata, Y. Nishino, A. Fukao and I. Tsuji, 
The association between coffee consumption and bladder cancer inci-
dence in a pooled analysis of the Miyagi Cohort Study and Ohsaki 
Cohort Study, Eur. J. Cancer Prev., 2016.
	 42.	 F. Turati, C. Bosetti, J. Polesel, A. Zucchetto, D. Serraino and M. Mon-
tella, et al. Coffee, tea, cola, and bladder cancer risk: dose and time rela-
tionships, Urology, 2015, 86(6), 1179–1184.
	 43.	 Z. Y. Su, L. Shu, T. O. Khor, J. H. Lee, F. Fuentes and A. N. Kong, A perspec-
tive on dietary phytochemicals and cancer chemoprevention: oxidative 
stress, nrf2, and epigenomics, Top. Curr. Chem., 2013, 329, 133–162.
	 44.	 U. Boettler, K. Sommerfeld, N. Volz, G. Pahlke, N. Teller and V. Somoza, 
et al. Coffee constituents as modulators of Nrf2 nuclear translocation 
and ARE (EpRE)-dependent gene expression, J. Nutr. Biochem., 2011, 
22(5), 426–440.
	 45.	 L. G. Higgins, C. Cavin, K. Itoh, M. Yamamoto and J. D. Hayes, Induction 
of cancer chemopreventive enzymes by coffee is mediated by transcrip-
tion factor Nrf2. Evidence that the coffee-specific diterpenes cafestol 
and kahweol confer protection against acrolein, Toxicol. Appl. Pharma-
col., 2008, 226(3), 328–337.
	 46.	 S. Kalthoff, U. Ehmer, N. Freiberg, M. P. Manns and C. P. Strassburg, 
Coffee induces expression of glucuronosyltransferases by the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor and Nrf2 in liver and stomach, Gastroenterology, 
2010, 139(5), 1699–1710, 710 e1–2.
	 47.	 S. J. Vicente, E. Y. Ishimoto and E. A. Torres, Coffee modulates tran-
scription factor Nrf2 and highly increases the activity of antioxidant 
enzymes in rats, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2014, 62(1), 116–122.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

97
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
	 48.	 N. Volz, U. Boettler, S. Winkler, N. Teller, C. Schwarz and T. Bakuradze, 
et al. Effect of coffee combining green coffee bean constituents with 
typical roasting products on the Nrf2/ARE pathway in vitro and in vivo, 
J. Agric. Food Chem., 2012, 60(38), 9631–9641.
	 49.	 U. Boettler, N. Volz, G. Pahlke, N. Teller, C. Kotyczka and V. Somoza, 
et al. Coffees rich in chlorogenic acid or N-methylpyridinium induce 
chemopreventive phase II-enzymes via the Nrf2/ARE pathway in vitro 
and in vivo, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2011, 55(5), 798–802.
	 50.	 IARC, Coffee. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risks 
to Humans, IARC, Lyon, France, 1991, vol. 51, pp. 41–206.
	 51.	 B. A. Kilman, Caffeine and Chromosomes, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1977.
	 52.	 P. M. Blagoeva, R. M. Balansky and T. J. Mircheva, Potentiation by 
caffeine of the frequencies of micronuclei induced by mitomycin C and 
cyclophosphamide in young mice, Mutat. Res., 1991, 246(1), 123–127.
	 53.	 R. C. Choudhury and A. K. Palo, Modulatory effects of caffeine on meth-
otrexate-induced cytogenotoxicity in mouse bone marrow, Environ. Tox-
icol. Pharmacol., 2004, 15(2), 79–85.
	 54.	 Z. Farooqi and P. C. Kesavan, Radioprotection by caffeine pre- and 
post-treatment in the bone marrow chromosomes of mice given whole-
body gamma-irradiation, Mutat. Res., 1992, 269(2), 225–230.
	 55.	 R. Sanyal, F. Darroudi, W. Parzefall, M. Nagao and S. Knasmuller, Inhi-
bition of the genotoxic effects of heterocyclic amines in human derived 
hepatoma cells by dietary bioantimutagens, Mutagenesis, 1997, 12(4), 
297–303.
	 56.	 V. S. Aboobaker, A. D. Balgi and R. K. Bhattacharya, In vivo effect of 
dietary factors on the molecular action of aflatoxin B1: role of non-­
nutrient phenolic compounds on the catalytic activity of liver fractions, 
In Vivo, 1994, 8(6), 1095–1098.
	 57.	 P. A. Egner, J. B. Wang, Y. R. Zhu, B. C. Zhang, Y. Wu and Q. N. Zhang, et 
al. Chlorophyllin intervention reduces aflatoxin-DNA adducts in indi-
viduals at high risk for liver cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2001, 
98(25), 14601–14606.
	 58.	 F. Galvano, A. Piva, A. Ritieni and G. Galvano, Dietary strategies to 
counteract the effects of mycotoxins: a review, J. Food Prot., 2001, 64(1), 
120–131.
	 59.	 J. E. Trosko, P. Frank, E. H. Chu and J. E. Becker, Caffeine inhibition 
of postreplication repair of N-acetoxy-2-acetylamino fluorene-dam-
aged DNA in Chinese hamster cells, Cancer Res., 1973, 33(10), 
2444–2449.
	 60.	 J. A. Rufian-Henares and S. Pastoriza, Biological effects of coffee mela-
noidins, in Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention, ed. V. Preedy, Aca-
demic Publication, Amsterdam, 2015, pp. 835–842.
	 61.	 J. Arauz, N. Zarco, J. Segovia, M. Shibayama, V. Tsutsumi and P. Muriel, 
Caffeine prevents experimental liver fibrosis by blocking the expression 
of TGF-beta, Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 2014, 26(2), 164–173.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
98
	 62.	 D. Gordillo-Bastidas, E. Oceguera-Contreras, A. Salazar-Montes, J. Gon-
zalez-Cuevas, L. D. Hernandez-Ortega and J. Armendariz-Borunda, Nrf2 
and Snail-1 in the prevention of experimental liver fibrosis by caffeine, 
World J. Gastroenterol., 2013, 19(47), 9020–9033.
	 63.	 H. Kasai, S. Fukada, Z. Yamaizumi, S. Sugie and H. Mori, Action of chlo-
rogenic acid in vegetables and fruits as an inhibitor of 8-hydroxydeox-
yguanosine formation in vitro and in a rat carcinogenesis model, Food 
Chem. Toxicol., 2000, 38(5), 467–471.
	 64.	 V. Benkovic, N. Orsolic, A. H. Knezevic, S. Ramic, D. Dikic and I. Basic, et 
al. Evaluation of the radioprotective effects of propolis and flavonoids 
in gamma-irradiated mice: the alkaline comet assay study, Biol. Pharm. 
Bull., 2008, 31(1), 167–172.
	 65.	 IARC, Caffeic Acid. Some Naturally Occurring Substances: Food Items and 
Constituents, Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines and Mycotoxins IARC Mono-
graphs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, IARC, Lyon, 
1993, vol. 56.
	 66.	 V. Ehrlich, A. Nersesyan, C. Hoelzl, F. Ferk, J. Bichler and S. Knasmuller, 
kanzerogene und genotoxische Pflanzeninhaltsstoffe, in Handbuch der 
Lebensmitteltoxikologie, ed. H. Dunkelberg, T. Gebel and A. Hartwig, 
Wiley, Weinheim, 2006, vol. 4.
	 67.	 E. Zeiger, Chlorogenic acid [327-97-9] and caffeic acid [331-39-5] review 
of toxicological literature. Integrated Laboratory Systems (NTP Pro-
gram), 1998.
	 68.	 K. S. Loveday, B. E. Anderson, M. A. Resnick and E. Zeiger, Chromosome 
aberration and sister chromatid exchange tests in Chinese hamster 
ovary cells in vitro. V: Results with 46 chemicals, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 
1990, 16(4), 272–303.
	 69.	 B. J. Majer, V. Mersch-Sundermann, F. Darroudi, B. Laky, K. de Wit and 
S. Knasmuller, Genotoxic effects of dietary and lifestyle related carcin-
ogens in human derived hepatoma (HepG2, Hep3B) cells, Mutat. Res., 
2004, 551(1–2), 153–166.
	 70.	 S. M. Galloway, M. J. Armstrong, C. Reuben, S. Colman, B. Brown 
and C. Cannon, et al. Chromosome aberrations and sister chromatid 
exchanges in Chinese hamster ovary cells: evaluations of 108 chemi-
cals, Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 1987, 10(Suppl 10), 1–175.
	 71.	 IARC. Coffee. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic 
Risks to Humans, IACR, 51. Lyon, France, 1991, Vol 51, pp. 41–206.
	 72.	 S. H. Bhat, A. S. Azmi and S. M. Hadi, Prooxidant DNA breakage induced 
by caffeic acid in human peripheral lymphocytes: involvement of 
endogenous copper and a putative mechanism for anticancer proper-
ties, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2007, 218(3), 249–255.
	 73.	 A. Simic, D. Manojlovic, D. Segan and M. Todorovic, Electrochemical 
behavior and antioxidant and prooxidant activity of natural phenolics, 
Molecules, 2007, 12(10), 2327–2340.
	 74.	 C. Hoelzl, H. Glatt, W. Meinl, G. Sontag, G. Haidinger and M. Kundi, 
et al. Consumption of Brussels sprouts protects peripheral human 
AQ12
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

99
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
lymphocytes against 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyri-
dine (PhIP) and oxidative DNA-damage: results of a controlled human 
intervention trial, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2008, 52(3), 330–341.
	 75.	 E. Sergediene, K. Jonsson, H. Szymusiak, B. Tyrakowska, I. M. Riet-
jens and N. Cenas, Prooxidant toxicity of polyphenolic antioxidants to 
HL-60 cells: description of quantitative structure-activity relationships, 
FEBS Lett., 1999, 462(3), 392–396.
	 76.	 J. deGraft-Johnson, K. Kolodziejczyk, M. Krol, P. Nowak, B. Krol and D. 
Nowak, Ferric-reducing ability power of selected plant polyphenols and 
their metabolites: implications for clinical studies on the antioxidant 
effects of fruits and vegetable consumption, Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Tox-
icol., 2007, 100(5), 345–352.
	 77.	 N. Yamanaka, O. Oda and S. Nagao, Prooxidant activity of caffeic acid, 
dietary non-flavonoid phenolic acid, on Cu2+-induced low density lipo-
protein oxidation, FEBS Lett., 1997, 405(2), 186–190.
	 78.	 S. Chlopcikova, J. Psotova, P. Miketova, J. Sousek, V. Lichnovsky 
and V. Simanek, Chemoprotective effect of plant phenolics against 
anthracycline-induced toxicity on rat cardiomyocytes. Part II. Caf-
feic, chlorogenic and rosmarinic acids, Phytother. Res., 2004, 18(5), 
408–413.
	 79.	 Y. Sato, S. Itagaki, T. Kurokawa, J. Ogura, M. Kobayashi and T. Hirano, 
et al. In vitro and in vivo antioxidant properties of chlorogenic acid and 
caffeic acid, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 403(1–2), 136–138.
	 80.	 H. S. Shin, H. Satsu, M. J. Bae, Z. Zhao, H. Ogiwara and M. Totsuka, et 
al. Anti-inflammatory effect of chlorogenic acid on the IL-8 production 
in Caco-2 cells and the dextran sulphate sodium-induced colitis symp-
toms in C57BL/6 mice, Food Chem., 2015, 168, 167–175.
	 81.	 S. C. Kwak, C. Lee, J. Y. Kim, H. M. Oh, H. S. So and M. S. Lee, et al. 
Chlorogenic acid inhibits osteoclast differentiation and bone resorp-
tion by down-regulation of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B 
ligand-induced nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 expression, Biol. 
Pharm. Bull., 2013, 36(11), 1779–1786.
	 82.	 H. Shi, L. Dong, X. Dang, Y. Liu, J. Jiang and Y. Wang, et al. Effect of 
chlorogenic acid on LPS-induced proinflammatory signaling in hepatic 
stellate cells, Inflammation Res., 2013, 62(6), 581–587.
	 83.	 R. Feng, Y. Lu, L. L. Bowman, Y. Qian, V. Castranova and M. Ding, Inhi-
bition of activator protein-1, NF-kappaB, and MAPKs and induction of 
phase 2 detoxifying enzyme activity by chlorogenic acid, J. Biol. Chem., 
2005, 280(30), 27888–27895.
	 84.	 Y. Liu and D. D. Kitts, Confirmation that the Maillard reaction is the 
principle contributor to the antioxidant capacity of coffee brews, Food 
Res. Int., 2011, 44(8), 2418–2424.
	 85.	 L. Goya, C. Delgado-Andrade, J. A. Rufian-Henares, L. Bravo and F. J. 
Morales, Effect of coffee melanoidin on human hepatoma HepG2 cells. 
Protection against oxidative stress induced by tert-butylhydroperoxide, 
Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2007, 51(5), 536–545.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
100
	 86.	 C. J. Dupas, A. C. Marsset-Baglieri, C. S. Ordonaud, F. M. G. Ducept and 
M. N. Maillard, Coffee antioxidant properties: Effect of milk addition 
and processing conditions, J. Food Sci., 2006, 71(3), S253–S258.
	 87.	 C. Delgado-Andrade, J. A. Rufian-Henares and F. J. Morales, Assessing 
the antioxidant activity of melanoidins from coffee brews by different 
antioxidant methods, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53(20), 7832–7836.
	 88.	 F. J. Morales and M. B. Babbel, Melanoidins exert a weak antiradical 
activity in watery fluids, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50(16), 4657–4661.
	 89.	 F. J. Morales and M. B. Babbel, Antiradical efficiency of Maillard reac-
tion mixtures in a hydrophilic media, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50(10), 
2788–2792.
	 90.	 K. Yanagimoto, K. G. Lee, H. Ochi and T. Shibamoto, Antioxidative activ-
ity of heterocyclic compounds found in coffee volatiles produced by 
Maillard reaction, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50(19), 5480–5484.
	 91.	 S. Cheriot, C. Billaud, S. Pöchtrager, K. H. Wagner and J. Nicolas, A 
comparison study between antioxidant and mutagenic properties of 
cysteine glucose-derived Maillard reaction products and neoformed 
products from heated cysteine and hydroxymethylfurfural, Food Chem., 
2009, 114(1), 132–138.
	 92.	 K. H. Wagner, S. Reichhold, K. Koschutnig, S. Cheriot and C. Billaud, 
The potential antimutagenic and antioxidant effects of Maillard reac-
tion products used as “natural antibrowning” agents, Mol. Nutr. Food 
Res., 2007, 51(4), 496–504.
	 93.	 S. Muscat, J. Pelka, J. Hegele, B. Weigle, G. Munch and M. Pischetsrie-
der, Coffee and Maillard products activate NF-kappaB in macrophages 
via H2O2 production, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2007, 51(5), 525–535.
	 94.	 T. Sauer, M. Raithel, J. Kressel, G. Munch and M. Pischetsrieder, Acti-
vation of the transcription factor Nrf2 in macrophages, Caco-2 cells 
and intact human gut tissue by Maillard reaction products and coffee, 
Amino acids, 2013, 44(6), 1427–1439.
	 95.	 R. Lang, E. F. Yagar, R. Eggers and T. Hofmann, Quantitative investiga-
tion of trigonelline, nicotinic acid, and nicotinamide in foods, urine, 
and plasma by means of LC-MS/MS and stable isotope dilution analy-
sis, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56(23), 11114–11121.
	 96.	 V. Somoza, M. Lindenmeier, E. Wenzel, O. Frank, H. F. Erbersdobler and 
T. Hofmann, Activity-guided identification of a chemopreventive com-
pound in coffee beverage using in vitro and in vivo techniques, J. Agric. 
Food Chem., 2003, 51(23), 6861–6869.
	 97.	 L. K. Lam, V. L. Sparnins and L. W. Wattenberg, Isolation and identifica-
tion of kahweol palmitate and cafestol palmitate as active constituents 
of green coffee beans that enhance glutathione S-transferase activity in 
the mouse, Cancer Res., 1982, 42(4), 1193–1198.
	 98.	 L. W. Wattenberg, A. B. Hanley, G. Barany, V. L. Sparnins and G. R. Fen-
wick, Inhibition of carcinogenesis by some minor dietary constituents, 
in Diet, nutrition and cancer, ed. Y. Hayashi, Japan Science Society Press, 
Tokyo, 1986, pp. 193–203.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

101
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
	 99.	 C. Cavin, D. Holzhauser, A. Constable, A. C. Huggett and B. Schilter, 
The coffee-specific diterpenes cafestol and kahweol protect against 
aflatoxin B1-induced genotoxicity through a dual mechanism, Carcino-
genesis, 1998, 19(8), 1369–1375.
	100.	 C. Cavin, D. Holzhaeuser, G. Scharf, A. Constable, W. W. Huber and B. 
Schilter, Cafestol and kahweol, two coffee specific diterpenes with anti-
carcinogenic activity, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2002, 40(8), 1155–1163.
	101.	 B. J. Majer, E. Hofer, C. Cavin, E. Lhoste, M. Uhl and H. R. Glatt, et al. 
Coffee diterpenes prevent the genotoxic effects of 2-amino-1-meth-
yl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) and N-nitrosodimethylamine 
in a human derived liver cell line (HepG2), Food Chem. Toxicol., 2005, 
43(3), 433–441.
	102.	 W. W. Huber, L. P. McDaniel, K. R. Kaderlik, C. H. Teitel, N. P. Lang and 
F. F. Kadlubar, Chemoprotection against the formation of colon DNA 
adducts from the food-borne carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylim-
idazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) in the rat, Mutat. Res., 1997, 376(1–2), 
115–122.
	103.	 W. W. Huber and W. Parzefall, Modification of N-acetyltransferases and 
glutathione S-transferases by coffee components: possible relevance 
for cancer risk, Methods Enzymol., 2005, 401, 307–341.
	104.	 K. J. Lee and H. G. Jeong, Protective effects of kahweol and cafestol 
against hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress and DNA damage, 
Toxicol. Lett., 2007, 173(2), 80–87.
	105.	 J. Y. Kim, K. S. Jung, K. J. Lee, H. K. Na, H. K. Chun and Y. H. Kho, et al. 
The coffee diterpene kahweol suppress the inducible nitric oxide syn-
thase expression in macrophages, Cancer Lett., 2004, 213(2), 147–154.
	106.	 J. Y. Kim, K. S. Jung and H. G. Jeong, Suppressive effects of the kahweol 
and cafestol on cyclooxygenase-2 expression in macrophages, FEBS 
Lett., 2004, 569(1–3), 321–326.
	107.	 W. W. Huber, G. Scharf, G. Nagel, S. Prustomersky, R. Schulte-Hermann 
and B. Kaina, Coffee and its chemopreventive components Kahweol 
and Cafestol increase the activity of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyl-
transferase in rat liver–comparison with phase II xenobiotic metabo-
lism, Mutat. Res., 2003, 522(1–2), 57–68.
	108.	 R. Urgert, N. Essed, G. van der Weg, T. G. Kosmeijer-Schuil and M. B. 
Katan, Separate effects of the coffee diterpenes cafestol and kahweol on 
serum lipids and liver aminotransferases, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 1997, 65(2), 
519–524.
	109.	 S. Knasmuller, M. Misik, W. Parzefall, K. H. Wagner, Krebs und 
Ernährung - Risiken und Prävention - wissenschaftliche Grundlagen und 
Ernährungsempfehlungen, Thieme, 2014.
	110.	 F. Bravi, C. Bosetti, A. Tavani, S. Gallus and C. La Vecchia, Coffee reduces 
risk for hepatocellular carcinoma: an updated meta-analysis, Clin. Gas-
troenterol. Hepatol., 2013, 11(11), 1413–1421e1.
	111.	 S. Saab, D. Mallam, G. A. Cox 2nd and M. J. Tong, Impact of coffee on 
liver diseases: a systematic review, Liver Int., 2014, 34(4), 495–504.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
102
	112.	 N. Kawada, T. Kuroki, K. Kobayashi, M. Inoue and K. Kaneda, Inhibi-
tion of myofibroblastic transformation of cultured rat hepatic stellate 
cells by methylxanthines and dibutyryl cAMP, Dig. Dis. Sci., 1996, 41(5), 
1022–1029.
	113.	 S. Chen, N. C. Teoh, S. Chitturi and G. C. Farrell, Coffee and non-al-
coholic fatty liver disease: brewing evidence for hepatoprotection?, J. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 2014, 29(3), 435–441.
	114.	 M. P. Zeegers, F. E. Tan, R. A. Goldbohm and P. A. van den Brandt, Are cof-
fee and tea consumption associated with urinary tract cancer risk? A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis, Int. J. Epidemiol., 2001, 30(2), 353–362.
	115.	 X. Yu, Z. Bao, J. Zou and J. Dong, Coffee consumption and risk of can-
cers: a meta-analysis of cohort studies, BMC Cancer, 2011, 11, 96.
	116.	 B. Halliwell, M. V. Clement and L. H. Long, Hydrogen peroxide in the 
human body, FEBS Lett., 2000, 486(1), 10–13.
	117.	 S. K. Bohn, R. Blomhoff and I. Paur, Coffee and cancer risk, epidemi-
ological evidence, and molecular mechanisms, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 
2014, 58(5), 915–930.
	118.	 J. H. Ellwanger, P. Molz, D. R. Dallemole, A. Pereira dos Santos, T. E. 
Muller and L. Cappelletti, et al. Selenium reduces bradykinesia and 
DNA damage in a rat model of Parkinson's disease, Nutrition, 2015, 
31(2), 359–365.
	119.	 L. H. Sanders, J. McCoy, X. Hu, P. G. Mastroberardino, B. C. Dickinson 
and C. J. Chang, et al. Mitochondrial DNA damage: molecular marker of 
vulnerable nigral neurons in Parkinson's disease, Neurobiol. Dis., 2014, 
70, 214–223.
	120.	 J. E. Simpson, P. G. Ince, T. Minett, F. E. Matthews, P. R. Heath and P. 
J. Shaw, et al. Neuronal DNA damage response-associated dysregula-
tion of signalling pathways and cholesterol metabolism at the earliest 
stages of Alzheimer-type pathology, Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol., 2015.
	121.	 M. A. Hernan, B. Takkouche, F. Caamano-Isorna and J. J. Gestal-Otero, 
A meta-analysis of coffee drinking, cigarette smoking, and the risk of 
Parkinson's disease, Ann. Neurol., 2002, 52(3), 276–284.
	122.	 J. F. Chen, K. Xu, J. P. Petzer, R. Staal, Y. H. Xu and M. Beilstein, et al. 
Neuroprotection by caffeine and A(2A) adenosine receptor inactivation 
in a model of Parkinson's disease, J. Neurosci., 2001, 21(10), RC143.
	123.	 J. L. Barranco Quintana, M. F. Allam, A. Serrano Del Castillo and R. Fer-
nandez-Crehuet Navajas, Alzheimer's disease and coffee: a quantitative 
review, Neurol. Res., 2007, 29(1), 91–95.
	124.	 K. Meuer, C. Pitzer, P. Teismann, C. Kruger, B. Goricke and R. Laage, et 
al. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor is neuroprotective in a model 
of Parkinson's disease, J. Neurochem., 2006, 97(3), 675–686.
	125.	 A. Prakash, K. Chopra and B. Medhi, Granulocyte-colony stimulating 
factor improves Parkinson's disease associated with co-morbid depres-
sion: an experimental exploratory study, Indian J. Pharmacol., 2013, 
45(6), 612–615.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

103
DNA Protective Properties of Coffee: From Cells to Humans
	126.	 C. Cao, L. Wang, X. Lin, M. Mamcarz, C. Zhang and G. Bai, et al. Caffeine 
synergizes with another coffee component to increase plasma GCSF: 
linkage to cognitive benefits in Alzheimer's mice, J. Alzheimer's Dis., 
2011, 25(2), 323–335.
	127.	 Y. S. Kim, S. M. Kwak and S. K. Myung, Caffeine intake from coffee or 
tea and cognitive disorders: a meta-analysis of observational studies, 
Neuroepidemiology, 2015, 44(1), 51–63.
	128.	 C. Santos, J. Costa, J. Santos, A. Vaz-Carneiro and N. Lunet, Caffeine 
intake and dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Alzhei-
mer's Dis., 2010, 20(Suppl 1), S187–S204.
	129.	 C. Santos, N. Lunet, A. Azevedo, A. de Mendonca, K. Ritchie and 
H. Barros, Caffeine intake is associated with a lower risk of cognitive 
decline: a cohort study from Portugal, J. Alzheimer's Dis., 2010, 20(Suppl 1), 
S175–S185.
	130.	 C. H. Ramlau-Hansen, A. M. Thulstrup, J. P. Bonde, J. Olsen and B. 
H. Bech, Semen quality according to prenatal coffee and present caf-
feine exposure: two decades of follow-up of a pregnancy cohort, Hum. 
Reprod., 2008, 23(12), 2799–2805.
	131.	 B. Adelusi, M. H. al-Twaijiri, A. al-Meshari, D. Kangave, L. A. al-Nu-
aim and B. Younnus, Correlation of smoking and coffee drinking with 
sperm progressive motility in infertile males, Afr. J. Med. Med. Sci., 1998, 
27(1–2), 47–50.
	132.	 B. P. Sobreiro, A. M. Lucon, F. F. Pasqualotto, J. Hallak, K. S. Athayde 
and S. Arap, Semen analysis in fertile patients undergoing vasectomy: 
reference values and variations according to age, length of sexual absti-
nence, seasonality, smoking habits and caffeine intake, Rev. Paul. Med., 
2005, 123(4), 161–166.
	133.	 P. B. Marshburn, C. S. Sloan and M. G. Hammond, Semen quality and 
association with coffee drinking, cigarette smoking, and ethanol con-
sumption, Fertil. Steril., 1989, 52(1), 162–165.
	134.	 N. D. Freedman, Y. Park, C. C. Abnet, A. R. Hollenbeck and R. Sinha, 
Association of coffee drinking with total and cause-specific mortality, 
N. Engl. J. Med., 2012, 366(20), 1891–1904.
	135.	 L. F. Andersen, D. R. Jacobs, Jr., M. H. Carlsen and R. Blomhoff, Con-
sumption of coffee is associated with reduced risk of death attributed to 
inflammatory and cardiovascular diseases in the Iowa Women's Health 
Study, Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 2006, 83(5), 1039–1046.
	136.	 M. Shimizu and E. Yano, Mutagenicity of instant coffee and its inter-
action with dimethylnitrosamine in the micronucleus test, Mutat. Res., 
1987, 189(3), 307–311.
	137.	 S. K. Abraham, Inhibitory effects of coffee on the genotoxicity of carcin-
ogens in mice, Mutat. Res., 1991, 262(2), 109–114.
	138.	 S. K. Abraham, Anti-genotoxic effects in mice after the interaction 
between coffee and dietary constituents, Food Chem. Toxicol., 1996, 
34(1), 15–20.
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Chapter 4
104
	139.	 W. Sakamoto, H. Isomura, K. Fujie, J. Nishihira, M. Ozaki and S. Yukawa, 
Coffee increases levels of urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine in rats, 
Toxicology, 2003, 183(1–3), 255–263.
	140.	 W. Sakamoto, H. Isomura, K. Fujie, K. Takahashi, K. Nakao and H. 
Izumi, Relationship of coffee consumption with risk factors of athero-
sclerosis in rats, Ann. Nutr. Metab., 2005, 49(3), 149–154.
	141.	 H. Morii, A. Kuboyama, T. Nakashima, K. Kawai, H. Kasai and K. Tamae, 
et al. Effects of instant coffee consumption on oxidative DNA damage, 
DNA repair, and redox system in mouse liver, J. Food Sci., 2009, 74(6), 
H155–H161.
	142.	 F. Salomone, G. Li Volti, P. Vitaglione, F. Morisco, V. Fogliano and 
A. Zappala, et al. Coffee enhances the expression of chaperones and 
antioxidant proteins in rats with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 
Transl. Res., 2014, 163(6), 593–602.
	143.	 M. Misik, C. Hoelzl, K. H. Wagner, C. Cavin, B. Moser and M. Kundi, et 
al. Impact of paper filtered coffee on oxidative DNA-damage: results of 
a clinical trial, Mutat. Res., 2010, 692(1–2), 42–48.
	144.	 T. Bakuradze, G. A. M. Parra, A. Riedel, V. Somoza, R. Lang and N. 
Dieminger, et al. Four-week coffee consumption affects energy intake, 
satiety regulation, body fat, and protects DNA integrity, Food Res. Int., 
2014, 63, 420–427.
AQ13
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
