www.consumerlab.com/answers/can-drinking-coffee-weaken-bones-or-worsen-arthritis/coffee-bone-health-arthritis/
Our Members Asked:
Can drinking coffee weaken bones or make arthritis
worse?
Written by Tod Cooperman, M.D.
 
Published November 20, 2020
Answer:
Drinking caffeinated coffee can increase calcium loss and reduce calcium absorption, but this is unlikely to significantly impact bone
health provided calcium intake is adequate.
Although research has been inconsistent, recent observational studies have found no link between coffee intake and the risk of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, drinking caffeinated coffee may interfere with the effectiveness of certain treatments for RA.
Coffee and Risk of Osteoporosis and Fracture
One observational study found that higher intake of coffee was associated with decreased bone mineral density at the hip and spine in

women, suggesting that coffee intake may contribute to calcium loss and bone loss. However, the association did not exist among
women who reportedly drank at least one glass of milk per day, suggesting that minor coffee-induced calcium loss could be offset by
adequate calcium intake (Barrett-Connor, JAMA 1994). In fact, some experts have estimated that adding only 1 to 2 tablespoons of milk
to a cup of coffee would be sufficient to counterbalance the small amount of coffee-induced calcium loss (Heany, Food Chem Toxicol
2002).
Most observational research has shown that moderate intake of coffee (up to about four 8-ounce cups per day) is not associated with
increased risk of osteoporosis or fracture in healthy adults, particularly in those with adequate calcium intake (Wikoff, Food Chem
Toxicol 2017).
To find out more about the amount of calcium that you should be getting to ensure adequate intake, see our table that lists the
recommended daily intake of calcium based on age. Also, see the Concerns and Cautions section of our Calcium Supplements Review
to learn about the risks of getting too much calcium.
Coffee and Risk of Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
One early observational study in Finland found that drinking 4 cups or more of coffee per day (primarily boiled coffee) was associated
with a more than 2-fold increased risk of developing rheumatoid factor (RF)-positive (but not RF-negative) RA compared to drinking less
than 4 cups per day. RF is a marker, but not a cause, of RA (Heliövaara, Ann Rheum Dis 2000).
Interestingly, a later study in the U.S. also found an association between coffee intake and increased risk of RF-positive (but not RF-
negative) RA. However, in this latter study, the link was observed for only decaffeinated (not caffeinated) coffee, while coffee intake in
the former study consisted of mainly caffeinated coffee (Mikuls, Arthritis Rheum 2002).
Keep in mind that the studies above show only associations and do not establish cause-and-effect relationships. Furthermore, more
recent observational studies have shown no association between coffee intake and RA risk (Pedersen, J Rheumatol 2005; Karlson,
Arthritis Rheum 2003). In fact, a large observational study in the U.S. among nearly 77,000 postmenopausal women found that coffee
intake was not associated with RA risk, regardless of whether the coffee was caffeinated or decaffeinated, filtered or unfiltered
(Lamichhane, J Clin Rheumatol 2019).
Drinking caffeinated coffee may, however, reduce the effects of certain RA medications. In a study among 39 people with RA who began
treatment with 7.5 mg of methotrexate weekly, those who drank higher amounts of caffeine (258.5 mg of caffeine daily) experienced
less response to treatment those who consumed less caffeine (88.8 mg of caffeine daily). There was no difference in response for
patients who consumed moderate amounts of caffeine (150.9 mg daily) compared to those who consumed low amounts. Based on
these results, it was estimated that caffeine intake in amounts >180 mg daily (equivalent to about two 8-ounce cups of coffee) may
interfere with methotrexate efficacy (Nesher, Arthritis Rheum 2003).
To learn about supplements that may help prevent RA or slow RA progression, see our answer to the question: Which supplements can
help with arthritis?
The Bottom Line:
Drinking caffeinated coffee can increase calcium loss and reduce calcium absorption, but this seems unlikely to significantly impact
bone health provided calcium intake is adequate. While results have been inconsistent, drinking coffee, particularly in moderation, does
not seem to be linked with risk of RA, but it might reduce the effects of RA treatments if consumed in excess.

Member: 837829 | Printed: 08/15/2023 9:05 a.m.
