Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 17 (2009) 681–697
681
DOI 10.3233/JAD-2009-1071
IOS Press
Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in
Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease
Transgenic Mice
Chuanhai Caoa,b, John R. Cirritoc, Xiaoyang Lina,b, Lilly Wangb,d, Deborah K Vergesc,
Alexander Dicksonb,d, Malgorzata Mamcarzb,d, Chi Zhanga,b, Takashi Morie, Gary W. Arendashb,d,∗,
David M. Holtzmanc,f,g and Huntington Pottera,b,h
aThe Byrd Alzheimer’s Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
bFlorida Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
cDepartment of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
dDepartment of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
eDepartments of Medical Science and Pathology, Saitama Medical Center and Saitama Medical University,
Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan
fDepartment of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
gHope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
hSuncoast Gerontology and Alzheimer’s Center, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
Abstract. Recent epidemiologic studies suggest that caffeine may be protective against Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Supportive
of this premise, our previous studies have shown that moderate caffeine administration protects/restores cognitive function
and suppresses brain amyloid-β (Aβ) production in AD transgenic mice. In the present study, we report that acute caffeine
administration to both young adult and aged AD transgenic mice rapidly reduces Aβ levels in both brain interstitial ﬂuid and
plasma without affecting Aβ elimination. Long-term oral caffeine treatment to aged AD mice provided not only sustained
reductions in plasma Aβ, but also decreases in both soluble and deposited Aβ in hippocampus and cortex. Irrespective of caffeine
treatment, plasma Aβ levels did not correlate with brain Aβ levels or with cognitive performance in individual aged AD mice.
Although higher plasma caffeine levels were strongly associated with lower plasma Aβ1−40 levels in aged AD mice, plasma
caffeine levels were also not linked to cognitive performance. Plasma caffeine and theophylline levels were tightly correlated,
both being associated with reduced inﬂammatory cytokine levels in hippocampus. Our conclusion is two-fold: ﬁrst, that both
plasma and brain Aβ levels are reduced by acute or chronic caffeine administration in several AD transgenic lines and ages,
indicating a therapeutic value of caffeine against AD; and second, that plasma Aβ levels are not an accurate index of brain Aβ
levels/deposition or cognitive performance in aged AD mice.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, amyloid-β, brain interstitial ﬂuid, caffeine, plasma, transgenic mice
INTRODUCTION
Synthetic anti-Alzheimer’s disease (AD) drugs cur-
rently on the market have mild symptomatic beneﬁts,
∗Corresponding author: Gary W. Arendash, Ph.D., Department
of Cell Biology, Microbiology, & Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA. Tel.: +1 813 974 1584; Fax:
+1 813 974 1614; E-mail: arendash@cas.usf.edu.
are not known to be disease-modifying, and can have
signiﬁcant undesirable side-effects. Thus, it would be
most desirable to identify an inherently safe and read-
ily available “nutriceutic” compound (e.g., natural and
normally in the diet) that can provide therapeutic util-
ity against AD. Caffeine is a methylxanthine, high-
ly concentrated in coffee, and probably the world’s
most widely consumed psychoactive substance [1].
The well known ability of caffeine to increase alert-
ISSN 1387-2877/09/$17.00 2009 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

682
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
ness and arousal primarily involves antagonism of cen-
tral nervous system adenosine receptors, while addi-
tional mechanisms of caffeine action (e.g., phospho-
diesterase inhibition, calcium mobilization) have been
proposed [2], although they occur only at high, unphys-
iologic concentrations of caffeine (mM range). Oral
caffeine is rapidly and almost completely absorbed via
the gastrointestinal tract, with blood caffeine levels
quickly equilibrating with brain tissue levels due to
caffeine’s unhindered traversal of the blood-brain bar-
rier [3,4].
Caffeine is primarily metabolized in the
liver to theophylline and paraxanthine, both of which
are at least as physiologically active as caffeine [3].
There are no apparent differences in metabolism of, or
physiologicalresponses to, caffeine in elder individuals
compared to young individuals; moreover, caffeine’s
pharmacokinetics are similar after oral or intravenous
administration in humans and animals [3].
Recent longitudinal studies spanning 4–10 years sug-
gest that habitual caffeine/coffeeintake protects against
cognitive impairment in aging humans [5,6]. More-
over, an epidemiologic study evaluated caffeine intake
during the 20 years preceding AD diagnosis and found
that AD patients consumed markedly less caffeine dur-
ing that period compared to age-matched individuals
without AD [7]. Collectively, these and other obser-
vational human studies [8] suggest that habitual caf-
feine/coffee intake may protect against memory impair-
ment and AD during aging. However, because such
studies are not controlled and cannot isolate the effect
of caffeine from the myriad of other lifestyle choic-
es humans make, we performed a highly controlled
“protection-based” study in mice [9]. In that study,
we found that oral caffeine administration to AD trans-
genic (APPsw) mice from young adulthood into old-
er age: 1) protected these mice from otherwise cer-
tain cognitive impairment in older age; and 2) limited
their brain production of the peptide amyloid-β (Aβ).
The moderate amount of caffeine intake given to these
APPsw mice (human equivalency of 5 cups of coffee
per day) suppressed both β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-
secretase/PS1 levels in hippocampus, indicating that
caffeine can directly impact AD pathogenesis in these
AD mice. This study in AD mice is consistent with the
human epidemiologicliterature supporting an ability of
moderatecaffeineintake to reducerisk of AD [7]. Para-
doxically, human intake of coffee/caffeine declines ap-
preciably during aging in Western cultures, in part due
to caffeine intake restrictions often suggested by health
care professions. Such restrictions would appear un-
warranted, based on comprehensive literature searches
indicating that moderate caffeine intake has no adverse
effects on the cardiovascular system, bone status, cal-
cium balance, or the incidence of cancer during ag-
ing [4,10]. Indeed, a recent study involving 18–24 year
follow-ups found that coffee intake (4–6 cups per day)
was associated with reduced mortality, particularly due
to cardiovascular disease [11].
The potential for caffeine to treat established AD
has yet to be explored in human studies. As an ini-
tial step for elucidating possible efﬁcacy of caffeine to
stabilize or reverse established AD, we have recent-
ly completed a “treatment-based” study in aged APP-
sw mice that already contained Aβ pathology (see ac-
companying paper [12]). These aged mice were con-
ﬁrmed to be cognitively impaired in working memo-
ry prior to receiving several months of oral caffeine
treatment. When re-tested, aged APPsw mice receiv-
ing caffeine treatment exhibited working memory that
was not only substantially better than APPsw mice that
did not receive caffeine, but comparable to normal non-
transgenic mice [12].
Thus, even with pre-existing
and substantial Aβ neuropathology, aged APPsw mice
exhibited memory restoration with caffeine treatment,
suggesting a therapeutic potential of caffeine in cases
of established AD.
Substantial evidence suggests that the brain’s pro-
duction and aggregation of Aβ peptide represent key
events underlying AD pathogenesis. As depicted in
Fig. 1A, newly produced Aβ enters a dynamic equilib-
rium between soluble and deposited Aβ in the brain,
with continual transport of soluble Aβ out of the brain
and into plasma. In view of our ﬁndings that caffeine
decreases Aβ production in APPsw mice through sup-
pression of both BACE1 and γ-secretase/PS1 [9], we
hypothesize that resultant lower brain levels of solu-
ble Aβ will at least acutely result in lower plasma Aβ
levels (Fig. 1B). This hypothesis is supported by the
ﬁnding that Aβ is rapidly produced and cleared from
the brain [13]. In the present study, we determine the
effect of both acute and chronic caffeine administration
on plasma and brain Aβ levels in AD mice. In addition,
we explore possible relationships between: 1) plasma
and brain pools of Aβ; 2) plasma caffeine/theophylline
concentrations and plasma/brain Aβlevels; and 3) plas-
ma Aβ/caffeine levels and cognitive performance. Pos-
sible associations between Aβ, caffeine, and cytokines
are also considered. Both young adult and aged AD
mice were utilized in these studies to investigate the
effect of caffeine at both early (pre-Aβ deposition) and
late (robust Aβ deposition) stages of the disease in
mice.

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
683
Fig. 1. Diagrams depicting brain Aβ production/clearance, the suppressive actions of caffeine on Aβ production, and resultant effects on brain
and plasma Aβ levels. (A) Unmodulated: Aβ is primarily produced in neurons, secreted into the brain extracellular space in soluble form,
then enters a dynamic equilibrium between soluble and deposited (insoluble) Aβ. Continual transport of soluble Aβ occurs into plasma. (B)
Caffeine: Short-Term: Caffeine suppression of both β- and γ-secretase activities reduces Aβ production, resulting in lower soluble Aβ in brain
and plasma. The equilibrium between soluble and deposited Aβ is not impacted by this short-term reduction in brain soluble Aβ levels. (C)
Caffeine: Long-Term: Continued caffeine suppression of Aβ production and resultant lower levels of brain soluble Aβ induce a ﬂux of deposited
(insoluble) Aβ to the soluble form, which is cleared from brain into plasma via soluble Aβ transport. Plasma Aβ levels may be reduced or
not changed, depending on degree of caffeine-induced suppression of Aβ production. In aged APPsw mice given chronic caffeine treatment,
their lower brain Aβ levels/deposition results in reversal of cognitive dysfunction. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at
www.iospress.nl.)
Based on encouraging results from our complet-
ed caffeine administration studies in AD transgenic
mice [9,12], clinical trials in aged individuals are cur-
rently being conducted to investigate the effects of caf-
feine administration on plasma Aβ levels. As such, a
major aim of the present study was to attain advance
insight into potential results from those clinical trials
through similar studies in AD transgenic mice.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Animals
In these studies, all mice (with two exceptions) had a
mixed background of 56.25% C57, 12.5% B6, 18.75%
SJL, and 12.5% Swiss-Webster and were derived from
a cross between heterozygous mice carrying the mu-
tant APPK670N, M671L gene (APPsw) with heterozy-
gous PS1 (Tg line 6.2) mice. This resulted in offspring
consisting of mutant APPsw, PS1, APPsw+PS1, and
non-transgenic (NT) genotypes. The two exceptions
were: 1) APPsw+PS1 mice used in the 7-day gav-
age treatment study, which had a B6C3 background
and were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, MA); and 2) Tg2576 mice used in the in vivo
microdialysis study, which had a C57/BL6/SJL back-
ground and were a gift from Karen Hsiao Ashe (Uni-
versity of Minnesota; Hsaio et al. 1996).
All mice
were maintained on a 12-hour dark and 12-hour light
cycle with ad libitum access to rodent chow and wa-
ter/caffeinated water. All animal procedures were per-
formed in AAALAC-certiﬁed facilities under protocols
approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-
mittees at University of South Florida and the JA Haley
VA Hospital.
General protocol
A spectrum of studies involving both acute and
chronic caffeine administration was performed in
APPsw/Tg2576 and APPsw+PS1 transgenic lines,
with plasma, neurochemical, and/or behavioral mea-
sures collected. It should be underscored that these
transgenic lines have measurable levels of soluble Aβ
in both brain and plasma in young adulthood, with their
brain levels of Aβ increasing appreciably during ag-
ing. This results in Aβ plaque formation beginning
around 10–11 months of age for APPsw/Tg2576 mice
and by 6 months of age for APPsw+PS1 mice. Thus,
the 3–4 month-old APPsw/Tg2576 mice used in these
studies had no Aβ deposition, while the 14 month and

684
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
older APPsw mice exhibited age-dependent Aβ depo-
sition. All APPsw+PS1 mice utilized in these studies
were at least 15 months of age and therefore had robust
Aβ deposition. The general protocol for each study is
indicated below:
Acute caffeine cffects on plasma Aβ levels
Acute (single treatment) administration of caffeine
or saline vehicle was given by intraperitoneal (i.p.) in-
jection or gavage to the following groups of mice: 3–4
month-old APPsw mice (i.p.), 14 month-old APPsw
mice (i.p. or gavage), and 14 month-old APPsw+PS1
mice (gavage). A pre-treatment blood sample (0.15
ml) was taken by sub-mandibular vein puncture 3–4
days before treatment. At 3–4 hours following caffeine
(1.5 mg/0.2 ml; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) or vehicle ad-
ministration, another blood sample was taken. In these
acute studies, each group of caffeine- or vehicle-treated
animals consisted of 5–7 Tg mice. For all acute caf-
feine treatment studies, an equivalent volume of 0.9%
saline (0.2 ml) was given immediately following any
blood sample taken.
Long-term caffeine effects on plasma Aβ levels
Longer term caffeine administration was given by
gavage to aged APPsw+PS1 mice. At 3–4 days fol-
lowing a pre-treatment blood sample, 15–20 month-
old APPsw+PS1 mice (n = 6) were started on twice-
daily caffeine treatment (1.5 mg/0.2 ml each) via gav-
age for 7 consecutive days. A blood sample was tak-
en on the ﬁnal day of caffeine treatment, as well as 9
days thereafter. A second group of four 20 month-old
APPsw+PS1 mice were pre-treatment bled, and then
given two caffeine treatments (1.5 mg/0.2 ml each) via
gavage every 4th day for up to two months. In this sec-
ond long-term study, blood samples were taken every
8th day during treatment, always on the day following
a treatment. As was the case for acute studies, volume
replacement with 0.9% saline occurred immediately
following each blood sample.
In vivo microdialysis: Acute caffeine effects on
interstitial ﬂuid (ISF) levels of Aβ in hippocampus
In vivo microdialysis was used to assess brain ISF
Aβx−40 in the hippocampus of awake, freely moving
Tg2576 mice.
Microdialysis was performed similar
to previously described methods [14]. This technique
samples soluble molecules within the extracellular ﬂu-
id that are smaller than 38-kilodaltons, the molecular
weight cut off of the probe membrane. Aβ capable of
entering the probe has been dubbed “exchangeable Aβ
or eAβ” [14]. The pool of eAβ is in dynamic equi-
librium with the total pool of ISF Aβ. During micro-
dialysis, mice were housed in a constant light condi-
tion and remained awake with freedom of movement
and ad lib food and water during microdialysis. Mi-
crodialysis perfusion buffer was artiﬁcial cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF) containing 0.15% bovine serum albumin
that was ﬁltered through a 0.1 µm membrane. Flow
rate was a constant 1.0 µl/minute, which recovers 23.4
± 1.7% (mean ± SEM) of exchangeable Aβ within
the brain ISF of Tg2576 mice. Samples were collected
every 30–60 minutes with a refrigerated fraction col-
lector into polypropylene tubes and assessed for Aβ by
sandwich ELISA at the completion of each experiment,
as described by Cirrito et al. [15]. Brieﬂy, Aβx−40
was assessed using an Aβ40-speciﬁc mouse monoclon-
al antibody, mHJ2, as a coating antibody and a bi-
otinylated central domain antibody, mHJ5.1, as the de-
tecting antibody, followed by streptavidin-poly-HRP-
40 (Fitzgerald Industries, Concord, MA). All ELISA
assays were developed using Super Slow ELISA TMB
(Sigma) and absorbance readona Bio-TekFL-600plate
reader (Winooski, Vermont) at 650 nm. Basal levels of
ISF Aβ were deﬁned as the mean concentration of Aβ
over 5–6 hours preceding drug treatment. The mean
in vivo concentration of basal ISF eAβ was 3.9 ± 0.78
ng/ml (n = 6). For each animal, all Aβ levels were
normalized to the basal Aβ concentration. Once basal
ISF Aβ levels were established, Tg2576 mice were ad-
ministered caffeine i.p. and ISF Aβ levels were sam-
pled every 30 minutes until the end of the study. Mice
were studied at 3 months of age, which is prior to Aβ
deposition in this mouse model.
ISF Aβ half-life was determined similar to Cirrito
et al. [14]. Microdialysis probes were inserted as de-
scribed previously. Basal levels of ISF Aβ were estab-
lished for ﬁve hours, followed by i.p. administration
of 30 mg/kg caffeine or vehicle (PBS). Three hours
after treatment, the γ-secretase inhibitor Compound E
(Alexis Biochemicals, San Diego, CA; 100 nM) was
added to the microdialysis perfusion buffer to rapidly
inhibit Aβ production near the probe. The IC50 for
this compound to inhibit γ-secretase activity in vitro is
0.3 nM. Microdialysis samples were collected every 30
minutes for an additional four hours and then assessed
for Aβx−40 by sandwich ELISA. The half-life of Aβ
was calculated based on the slope of decline in ISF
Aβ levels [14] beginning one hour after the onset of
Compound E administration.

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
685
Long-term caffeine effects in behaviorally-tested mice
At 18–19 months of age, APPsw and NT littermate
controls were pre-tested in the radial arm water maze
(RAWM) task of working memory according to our
established protocol [9,12,16].
Following conﬁrma-
tion that APPsw mice were cognitively-impaired, they
were divided into two groups, with half of Tg mice
started on caffeine administered in their drinking wa-
ter (0.3 mg/ml, providing a daily dose of ≈1.5 mg
caffeine/mouse) and the other half remaining on stan-
dard tap water, as detailed previously [9].
At 4–5
weeks into caffeine treatment, all mice were re-tested
in the RAWM, with both last block and overall errors
being analyzed for working memory Trials 4 and 5.
Following completion of behavioral testing at 20–21
months of age, mice were deeply anesthetized with
sodium pentobarbital, a blood sample was then taken
for neurochemical analysis, followed by transcardial
perfusion with 100 ml of 0.9% saline.
Postmortem
brains were immediately removed and bisected sagital-
ly. The hippocampus and cerebral cortex was dissected
from the right hemisphere and processed for soluble
Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 determinations by ELISA, as well
as for cytokine levels. Brieﬂy, 30 mg brain samples
were homogenized in 400 µl RIPA buffer [100 mM
Tris [pH8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% DOC, 1% NP-40,
0.2% SDS, and 1 tablet proteinase inhibitor per 100
ml (S8820, Sigma)], and sonicated for 20 seconds on
ice. Samples were then centrifuged for 30 minutes at
27,000 g at 4◦C, and supernatants were transferred into
new screw cap tube. The supernatants obtained from
this protocol were then stored at −80◦C for determina-
tion of soluble Aβ levels using ELISA kits (KHB3482
for 40, KHB3442 for 42, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Standard and samples were mixed with detection an-
tibody and loaded on the antibody pre-coated plate as
the designated wells. HRP-conjugated antibody was
added after wash, and substrates were added for col-
orimetric reaction, and then stopped with sulfuric acid.
Optical density was obtained and concentrations were
calculated according a standard curve. Plasma Aβ1−40
and Aβ1−42 levels were determined with the same pro-
tocol and using the same ELISA kits. Homogenates
from the right hippocampus and cerebral cortex were
also analyzed for cytokine levels (see next section).
The left hemisphere was histologically processed
for analysis of total Aβ deposition, as previously de-
scribed [17]. Brieﬂy, equally-spaced 5-µm sections at
the hippocampal level were immunostained for total
Aβ deposition using a biothinylated human Aβ mon-
oclonal antibody (clone 4G8; Covance Res. Products,
Everyville, CA). Quantitative image analysis was then
performed according to Mori et al. [18] and Aβ bur-
den was determined as a percentage of immunolabeled
area (positive pixels) relative to the full area captured
(total pixels). Quantitative image analysis was done
based on previous methods with modiﬁcations [18,19].
Images were acquired using an Olympus BX60 mi-
croscope with an attached digital camera system (DP-
70, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The digital image was
then routed into a Windows PC for quantitative anal-
ysis using SimplePCI software (Compix Inc., Imaging
Systems, Cranberry Township, PA). Images of ﬁve 5-
µm sections (150 µm apart) through the hippocampus
were captured from each animal, and a threshold op-
tical density was obtained that discriminated staining
from background. Each region of interest was manual-
ly edited to eliminate artifacts. For Aβ burden analy-
sis, data are reported as percentage of immunolabeled
area captured (positive pixels) relative to the full area
captured (total pixels). Each analysis was done by a
single examiner blinded to sample identities.
Plasma neurochemical analysis
Plasma from blood samples was analyzed for levels
of Aβ1−40, caffeine, theophylline (a caffeine metabo-
lite), and cytokines. Aβ1-40 levels were determined
according to the aforementioned methodology involv-
ing brain tissues.
Plasma caffeine and theophylline
concentration were measured with ELISA Kits from
Neogen (Lansing, MI, USA) by following the manu-
facture protocol. In brief, the enzyme conjugate solu-
tion was prepared by diluting the 180X enzyme conju-
gate stock 1 to 180 in the EIA buffer provided. Caf-
feine (or theophylline) standard was then diluted with
EIA buffer at two fold dilutions from 200 ng/ml to 0.39
ng/ml. Then 20 µl standard of each dilution was added
into the coated plate. Plasma samples were then diluted
with EIA buffer, with 20 µl of this dilution added into
the coated plate. Both standard and samples were run
in duplicate in the plate. Positive and negative controls
of 20 µl were loaded to each plate. Then 180 µl of di-
luted drug-enzyme conjugate was added into each well
and mixed by gently shaking the plate. Plates were
covered with plastic ﬁlm and incubated at room tem-
perature for 45 minutes. During the incubation, a 10x
wash buffer was diluted to 1X with DI water and mixed
thoroughly. Once incubation was completed, the liquid
was dumped from the wells. Plates were then taped on
a clean lint-free towel to remove any remaining liquid
in the wells. Then each well was washed with 300 µl of

686
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
diluted wash buffer 3 times. After completing the last
wash step, the bottom of the wells was wiped with a
lint-freetowel to removeany liquid onthe outsideof the
wells. Then 150 µl of the K-Blue Substrate was added
to each well with a multi-channel pipette. The plate was
then mixed by gently shaking, followed by incubation
at room temperature for 5 to 20 minutes. To stop the
enzyme reaction, 50 µl of red stop solution was added
to each well and gently mixed. The absorbance was
then measured with plate reader (Synergy HT, Biotek,
VT) at a wavelength of 650 nm. The absorbance was
converted into concentration using Gen5 software.
Cytokine expression proﬁles were detected using the
Bio-Plex kits (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, catalogue #
171F11181). Samples and standards were prepared us-
ing company protocols with the initial concentration of
standards ranging from 32 ng/ml to 1.95 pg/ml. Plas-
ma samples were prepared for analysis by diluting 1
volume of the serum sample with 3 volumes of the Bio-
Plex mouse sample diluents. Details of this procedure
were performed by followed the protocol provided by
the manufacture. Finally, the plates were read. Each
cytokine level was calculated based on its own stan-
dard curve. Brain cytokine and chemokine levels were
detected with the same method.
Statistical analyses
Group comparisons involving levels of soluble/de-
posited Aβ, caffeine, theophylline, and cytokines were
performed using ANOVA. For determination of pre-
treatment versus post-treatment differences in plasma
Aβ level, paired t-tests were employed. All other sta-
tistical analyses are as indicated in the text. In order to
test if relationships were present between plasma, neu-
rochemical, and behavioral measures, correlation anal-
ysis was performed using the Systat analytical software
package.
RESULTS
Acute caffeine administration reduces plasma Aβ level
We have previously found that Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42
generation is decreased in N2a neuronal cell cultures
following 6 hours of caffeine treatment [9].
More-
over, these reductions in generation of both Aβ 1−40
and Aβ1−42 peptides were dose-dependent, occurring
at caffeine concentrations (⩽10 µM), which are typi-
cally present in plasma following coffee consumption
in humans. Given the rapid delivery of caffeine to all
body organs including the brain, we therefore hypothe-
sized that acute caffeine administration would quickly
suppress brain Aβ production in AD transgenic mice,
resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in plasma Aβ levels
within hours. In an initial study in which 3–4 month-
old APPsw mice (pre-plaque) were given a single i.p.
injection of caffeine (1.5 mg), plasma Aβ1−40 levels
were signiﬁcantly reduced by 41% at 3 hours post-
treatment compared to pre-treatment levels (Fig. 2A);
vehicle injection failed to affect plasma Aβ levels in
other littermate APPsw mice. Caffeine-induced reduc-
tions in plasma Aβ1−40 levels were also observed in
aged 14 month-old APPsw mice (plaque-bearing) at 3
hours following either a single i.p. or gavage treatment
with the same dose of caffeine (Fig. 2B). Moreover,
plasma caffeine concentrations in these same 14 month-
old APPsw mice were negatively correlated with plas-
ma Aβ1−40 levels; higher plasma caffeine levels were
associated with lower plasma Aβ levels in individual
animals (Fig. 2C). Even aged 19-month APPsw+PS1
mice (plaque-bearing) exhibited signiﬁcant reductions
in plasma Aβ1−40 levels at 3 hours following gavage
treatment with caffeine (Fig. 2D).
Long-term oral caffeine treatment provides a
sustained reduction in plasma Aβ levels
Our prior work has demonstrated that hippocampal
levels of both soluble and insoluble Aβ are reduced
by greater than 30% following 51/2 months of oral caf-
feine treatment (≈1.5 mg/day) to young adult APP-
sw mice [9]. In the same study, we also found this
same treatment to be effective in reducing insoluble
hippocampal Aβ levels in aged 17 month-old APPsw
mice following 18 days of treatment. We therefore hy-
pothesizedthat long-termoral caffeinetreatment would
result in a sustained suppression of plasma Aβ levels.
In fact, aged 15–20 month-old APPsw mice (plaque-
bearing) that were given oral treatment with 1.5 mg
caffeine twice daily for one week did exhibit signiﬁ-
cant reductions in plasma levels of both Aβ1−40 and
Aβ1−42 compared to pre-treatment values (Fig. 2E). At
9 days following cessation of this caffeine treatment,
however, plasma levels of both Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42
had returned to their pre-treatment levels. In a second
long-term treatment study, 20 month-old APPsw+PS1
mice (plaque-bearing) were given oral caffeine treat-
ment (1.5 mg) twice daily every 4th day over a 2
month period. Periodic analysis of plasma Aβ1−40 and
Aβ1−42 levels during this treatment period revealed not

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
687
Fig. 2. Caffeine treatment induces a rapid and sustained decrease in plasma Aβ levels. (A,B,D) A single i.p. or gavage treatment with caffeine
signiﬁcantly reduces plasma Aβ levels in 3–4 month-old (A) and 14 month-old (B) APPsw mice; as well as in 19 month-old APP+PS1 mice
(D). In all three studies, saline vehicle treatment had no effect. (C) Plasma caffeine levels in 14M old APPsw mice are inversely correlated
with plasma Aβ1−40 levels. (E) Oral caffeine treatment for one week to 15–20 month-old APPsw mice results in decreased plasma levels of
both Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 immediately following treatment, with a rebound in plasma Aβ levels occurring by 9 days after cessation of caffeine
treatment. Each group in A, B, D, and E consisted of 5–10 mice. (F) As exempliﬁed by two aged 20 month-old APP+PS1 mice, oral caffeine
administration every 4th day over a 2-month period induces a sustained and continual decrease in plasma levels of both Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42
over the treatment period. Post-treatment versus pre- or delayed post-treatment Aβ levels were evaluated by paired t-tests. ∗p < 0.05–0.01
versus pre-treatment levels; ∗∗p < 0.05 versus both pre-treatment and 9-day post-treatment levels. (Colours are visible in the electronic version
of the article at www.iospress.nl.)

688
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
Fig. 3. Caffeine lowers interstitial ﬂuid (ISF) Aβ levels. (A) Brain ISF Aβx −40 levels were measured by in vivo microdialysis. Prior to treatment
with caffeine, ISF Aβ levels ﬂuctuated very little. A low dose (5 mg/kg) and a higher dose (30 mg/kg) of caffeine caused ISF Aβ levels to
decrease signiﬁcantly compared to basal levels. (B) Following a 5 mg/kg dose of caffeine i.p., ISF Aβx −40 levels decreased by 19% compared to
basal levels (∗p < 0.05), while a 30 mg/kg administration decreased Aβ levels by 33% (∗∗p < 0.01, n = 6 per group). The mean concentration
of ISF Aβ represents an average of hours 2–3 after each dose of caffeine when Aβ levels had stabilized. (C) Tg2576 were pre-treated with vehicle
or 30 mg/kg caffeine for 3 hours (n = 6 per group), followed by administration of 100 nM Compound E, a γ-secretase inhibitor, via reverse
microdialysis. In both groups, ISF Aβ levels decreased rapidly when APP cleavage was blocked. (D) The elimination half-life of ISF Aβ x −40
was comparable in vehicle-treated and caffeine-treated mice, suggesting that caffeine does not affect ISF Aβ elimination, but likely impacts Aβ
production instead. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
only a sustained reduction in both Aβ peptides, but al-
so a continuing decrease in their levels throughout the
2-month treatment. Given that the half-life of caffeine
in rodents is only 0.7 to 1.2 hours [3], these later ob-
servations suggest that the effects of caffeine on Aβ
suppression greatly exceed its own half-life.
Caffeine administration lowers brain interstitial ﬂuid
levels of Aβ in vivo
Aβ is primarily produced in neurons and secreted
into the brain extracellular space where it is normally
soluble within ISF. To determine if caffeine adminis-
tration acutely affects brain ISF Aβ levels, 3 month-old
Tg2576 mice (pre-Aβ plaque) were treated with sev-
eral doses of caffeine during in vivo microdialysis to
measure ISF Aβ levels. Microdialysis probes were im-
planted into the hippocampus, permitting us to sample
ISF Aβ levels every 30 minutes for up to 24 hours in
awake, behaving animals [14,15]. Basal ISF Aβ lev-
els were determined over 6 hours in each mouse fol-
lowed by i.p. administration of caffeine at 5 mg/kg
(∼0.15 mg/mouse), then at 30 mg/kg (∼1 mg/mouse)

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
689
Fig. 4. Long-term caffeine administration to aged, cognitively-impaired APPsw mice reduces soluble Aβ levels in both cortex and hippocampus,
while also decreasing deposited (insoluble) Aβ in hippocampus. Caffeine was administered to 18–19 month-old APPsw mice for two months in
their drinking water. Both brain Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 were decreased in caffeine-treated Tg mice. Although plasma Aβ levels were unaffected
for all Tg/Caff mice inclusively, see Fig. 7B. Immunohistochemical Aβ deposition in the hippocampus was reduced by 40% in caffeine treatment
mice. ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.001. Each group consisted of 5–8 mice. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
3 hours later (Fig. 3A). Caffeine signiﬁcantly lowered
ISF Aβ levels by 19% and 32% at the low and high
doses, respectively, as compared to the basal ISF Aβ
levels in each mouse (Fig. 3B). There was also a trend
that Aβ levels were reduced to a greater extent by the
30 mg/kg dose of caffeine than by the 5 mg/kg dose
(p = 0.1).
Caffeine can have many affects in a living animal
which could potentially alter Aβ production or Aβ
elimination, thus lowering ISF Aβ levels [3,20]. As
such, we determinedthe elimination half-life of ISF Aβ
in mice treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg caffeine. Basal
ISF Aβ levels were measured in Tg2576 mice,followed
by i.p. administration of 30 mg/kg caffeine or vehicle
(Fig. 3C). As expected, caffeine reduced ISF Aβ lev-
els by 35% compared to no change in vehicle-treated
mice. Three hours later, the microdialysis perfusion
buffer was switched to contain a potent γ-secretase in-
hibitor, Compound E, to rapidly block Aβ production.
In vehicle-treated mice, the elimination half-life of Aβ
was 1.5 hours (Fig. 3D), which is similar to previous re-
ports of the ISF Aβ half-life in this mouse model [21].
Importantly, the half-life of ISF Aβ in caffeine-treated
mice (1.3 hours) was not signiﬁcantly different from
vehicle-treated mice. This suggests that caffeine does
not alter ISF Aβ elimination, but likely impacts some
aspect of Aβ production instead.
Long-term oral caffeine treatment to aged,
cognitively-impaired APPsw mice reduces brain
soluble and deposited Aβ
To determine the effects of chronic caffeine treat-
ment in cognitively-impaired AD mice,
caffeine
(∼1.5 mg/day) was orally administered in drinking wa-
ter to 18–19 month-old APPsw mice (plaque-bearing)
that were conﬁrmed to be impaired in the RAWM task
of working memory prior to treatment. At 4–5 weeks
into caffeine treatment, impaired APPsw mice that had
been given caffeine (Tg/Caff) exhibited substantial-
ly better RAWM working memory performance com-
pared to the continuing impairment of control APPsw
mice [12]. After euthanizia at 20–21 months of age (2
months into caffeine treatment), soluble Aβ1−42 levels
in both cortex and hippocampus of Tg/Caff mice were
signiﬁcantly reduced by 51% and 59%, respectively,
compared to Tg controls (Fig. 4A). Cortical and hip-
pocampal Aβ1−40 levels were also reduced by chronic
caffeine treatment, although the decrease in hippocam-
pal Aβ1−40 did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (p =
0.09). Compared to Tg controls, plasma Aβ1−40 lev-
els were not signiﬁcantly decreased in Tg/Caff mice.
However, when Tg/Caff mice were divided into two
sub-groups based on higher versus lower plasma caf-
feine levels, a signiﬁcant decrease in plasma Aβ1−40

690
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
Fig. 5. Plasma Aβ levels do not correlate with brain Aβ levels in aged APPsw mice. (A,B) Strong correlations are present between levels of
Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 for both soluble and insoluble Aβ in hippocampus, irrespective of caffeine treatment. By contrast, no correlations existed
between hippocampus (or cortex) and plasma for soluble Aβ levels (C) or insoluble Aβ levels (D) irrespective of caffeine treatment. (Colours
are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
was evident in higher plasma caffeine mice (see section
below). Finally, and in the same behaviorally-tested
aged Tg mice, chronic caffeine treatment resulted in a
remarkable 40% reduction in hippocampal Aβ depo-
sition compared to Tg controls (Fig. 4B). Brain levels
of insoluble Aβ (as measured by ELISA) were also
reduced in caffeine-treated Tg mice, as exempliﬁed by
the 29% and 33% decreases in Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42,
respectively, seen in posterior cortex (data not shown).
Plasma Aβ levels do not correlate with brain Aβ
levels or cognitive performance in aged APPsw mice
To explore the relationship between brain and plas-
ma pool of Aβ, as well as the association between var-
ious Aβ pools and cognitive performance, we next per-
formed correlation analysis between these measures in
the same aged APPsw mice whose brain and plasma
Aβ measures were presented in Fig. 4. These 20–21
month-old APPsw mice exhibited strong correlations
between Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 levels in hippocampus
and cortex, and for both soluble and insoluble Aβ pools
(Fig. 5A and B). These correlations were present irre-
spective of whether all Tg mice, or only Tg controls
were included. In sharp contrast, plasma Aβ1−40 was
not correlated with any of the 8 brain Aβ measures
evaluated (e.g., hippocampus or cortex, soluble or in-
soluble, Aβ1−40 or Aβ1−40). Figure 5C and D show
two representative plots involving hippocampal solu-
ble/insoluble Aβ1−40 versus plasma Aβ1−40. The lack
of correlations between brain and plasma Aβ measures
was present irrespective of whether all Tg mice, or only
Tg controls were included. Finally, there were no cor-
relations between plasma Aβ1−40 levels and four mea-
sures of cognitive performance in the RAWM task of
working memory; two of these correlations are shown
in Fig. 6 (A and B). However, as we have consistently
shown in prior studies [22–25], Aβ levels in cerebral
cortex, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampuswere close-
ly linked to RAWM performance; higher brain Aβ lev-

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
691
Fig. 6. Plasma Aβ levels do not correlate with cognitive performance in aged APPsw mice. (A,B) No correlations were present between plasma
Aβ levels and RAWM working memory. (C,D). By contrast, strong correlations were evident between brain Aβ levels/deposition and cognitive
impairment, as exempliﬁed by correlations involving soluble Aβ levels in posterior cortex (C) and Aβ deposition in entorhinal cortex (D). Each
symbol represents an individual Tg mouse. All correlations involve all Tg mice collectively (Tg controls and Tg/Caff), although identical results
were observed when only Tg controls were included in the analysis. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
els were strongly correlated with poorer working mem-
ory performance (Fig. 6C and D). Thus, plasma lev-
els of Aβ are not an accurate index of: 1) soluble or
insoluble brain Aβ; or 2) cognitive performance.
The relationship between plasma caffeine levels in
aged APPsw mice and their plasma/brain Aβ levels
and cognitive performance
Plasma taken at euthanasia from the 6 behaviorally-
tested 20–21 month-old APPsw mice that have been
given oral caffeine treatment for two months was an-
alyzed for concentrations of caffeine and theophylline
(a major biologically-active metabolite of caffeine). A
strong inverse correlation was evident between plasma
caffeine concentration in those mice and their plasma
levels of Aβ1−40 (Fig. 7A), with higher plasma caffeine
levels associated with lower plasma Aβ levels. Be-
cause there was a signiﬁcant range in plasma caffeine
concentrations among these animals, the three APP-
sw mice with the highest plasma caffeine levels [mean
= 9331 ng/ml] were compared to the three mice with
the lowest levels for plasma Aβ levels [mean = 769
ng/ml]. Mice with higher plasma caffeine levels had
signiﬁcantly reduced plasma Aβ1−40 levels compared
to those with lower plasma caffeine levels (Fig. 7B).
However, plasma caffeine levels in these APPsw mice
were not correlated with their Aβ1−40 or Aβ1−42 lev-
els in either hippocampus or cerebral cortex (data not
shown). Moreover, as was the case for plasma Aβ lev-
els (Fig. 6A and B), there were no correlations between
plasma caffeine levels and RAWM working memory
performance in aged APPsw mice (Fig. 7C and D).
Plasma caffeine levels were, however, strongly corre-
lated with plasma levels of theophylline (Fig. 7E). Im-
portantly for human relevance, the 6 aged APPsw mice
chronically treated with caffeine had a mean plasma
caffeine concentration of 26 ± 11.5 µM, which is com-

692
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
Fig. 7. Effects of caffeine and theophylline on plasma, brain, and cognitive measures. In aged 20–21 month-old APPsw mice that had been
treated for 2 months with caffeine and cognitively evaluated (n = 6), blood and brain tissues taken at euthanasia were analyzed. (A) High plasma
caffeine levels correlated with lower plasma Aβ levels. (B) Mice with higher plasma caffeine levels had lower plasma Aβ1−40 levels and lower
hippocampal cytokine levels than those mice with lower caffeine levels. ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01. (C,D) As exempliﬁed by these 2 correlation
graphs, plasma caffeine levels in individual mice were not correlated with their radial arm water maze (RAWM) working memory performance.
(E) Plasma caffeine and plasma theophylline levels were strongly correlated. (F) High plasma theophylline levels correlated with lower plasma
IFN-γ levels. (Colours are visible in the electronic version of the article at www.iospress.nl.)
parable to plasma caffeine levels in humans following
several cups of coffee [3].
The association of Aβ and caffeine levels in plasma
with cytokines in plasma/brain
Aβ and caffeine have been reported to have pro- and
anti-inﬂammatory actions,respectively [20,26]. There-
fore, we investigated whether plasmalevels ofthese two
compounds impacted plasma or brain cytokine levels
in aged APPsw mice (plaque-bearing) following two
months of oral caffeine treatment. Plasma Aβ1−40 lev-
els were not correlated with plasma cytokine levels for
all Tg mice collectively, irrespectively of caffeine treat-
ment (data not shown). Additionally, plasma caffeine
levels in caffeine-treated Tg mice were not correlated
with plasma cytokine levels (data not shown). Indeed,
there were largely no differences in “plasma” cytokine
levels between non-transgenic, Tg, and Tg/Caff groups
in this study (data not shown). Although this was also
the case for “brain” cytokine levels, closer inspection
revealed potential effects of caffeine on levels of key

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
693
inﬂammatory cytokines. Speciﬁcally among caffeine-
treated Tg mice, those mice with higher caffeine lev-
els had signiﬁcantly reduced levels of hippocampal cy-
tokines compared to mice with lower caffeine levels
(Fig. 7B). These results suggest an anti-inﬂammatory
action of caffeine in a key brain area for cognitive func-
tion. The caffeine metabolite “theophylline” may al-
so be contributory to the anti-inﬂammatory effect of
caffeine, as exempliﬁed by the lower levels of plas-
ma interferon (IFN)-γ in APPsw mice having higher
plasma theophylline levels (Fig. 7F). Indeed, plasma
levels of theophylline in caffeine-treated APPsw mice:
1) were correlated with lower cytokine levels in both
hippocampus and cortex; and 2) showed the same anti-
inﬂammatory proﬁle as caffeine (Fig. 7B) when ana-
lyzed in terms of high vs. low theophylline levels (data
not shown).
DISCUSSION
In this report, we show that caffeine treatment to AD
transgenic mice lowers Aβ levels in plasma and brain
ISF within a few hours and can provide continued re-
ductions in plasma Aβ through oral treatment periods
of 1-8 weeks. Even in aged, cognitively-impairedAPP-
sw mice bearing pre-existing and substantial Aβ bur-
dens, oral caffeine administration over several months
reduced both soluble and deposited brain Aβ. Related-
ly, this same caffeine treatment reverses the poor mem-
ory performance of aged APPsw mice back to the level
of non-transgenic (normal) mice [12]. However, be-
cause there were no correlations between hippocampal
and plasma Aβ levels in individual mice, we conclude
that plasma Aβ levels are not an accurate index of brain
Aβ levels in aged AD mice. Moreover, because there
were no correlations between plasma Aβ levels and
cognitive performance in the same aged AD mice, we
conclude that blood Aβ levels are not an accurate index
of cognitive performance. From an overall perspec-
tive, then, plasma Aβ levels are not a viable biomarker
for the cognitive and neurochemical characteristics of
aged AD mice. The inability of plasma Aβ1−40 levels
to acutely reﬂect decreased brain Aβ1−40 levels may
involve a consequent, acute decrease in Aβ1−40 trans-
porter activity (below saturability levels) at the blood
brain barrier [27]. Secondly, our collective results un-
derscore that caffeine, its metabolites, and/or analogs
should be consideredfor preventionand treatment trials
in AD because caffeine can suppress Aβ production,
but not its clearance from the brain.
The concentration of Aβ in brain tissue and CSF
is some 50–100 times higher than in plasma [28]. It
is thus likely that a sizable amount of plasma Aβ1−40
originates from production in, and out of, the brain.
Indeed, Aβ is rapidly produced and cleared from the
brain, with similar ISF clearance rates in AD mice and
humans [13,14]. Given the relatively short (<2 hours)
half-life of ISF Aβ in AD mice [14], it is apparent that
newly produced Aβ enters a dynamic equilibrium be-
tween soluble and insoluble/deposited Aβ in the brain,
with continual transport of soluble Aβ out of the brain
and into plasma (Fig. 1, Unmodulated). In the present
study, a single treatment with caffeine rapidly reduced
both brain ISF and plasma levels of Aβ1−40 within
several hours, indicating a direct and immediate effect
of caffeine on brain Aβ levels. Alternatively, because
blood platelets appear to be the primary source of cir-
culating APP and Aβ, it is possible that caffeine was
independently lowering plasma Aβ by suppressing Aβ
production from blood platelets. The peripheral pro-
duction of Aβ could certainly be one explanation for the
lack of correlations between plasma and brain Aβ – or
between plasma Aβ and any behavioral/neurochemical
markers evaluated in this study.
A single treatment with caffeine did not affect the
half-life of ISF Aβ, demonstrating that caffeine had
affected brain Aβ production rather than its elimi-
nation.
Underscoring this premise, our prior stud-
ies [9,12] show that caffeine affects Aβ production
through suppression of both β-secretase (BACE1)
and γ-secretase/PS1 expression. Whether or not this
caffeine-induced suppression of Aβ production is di-
rect or involves adenosine receptor blockade/mediation
is currently unknown and a subject of current research
in our laboratories. Acutely, such decreased Aβ pro-
duction would result in lower soluble Aβ in brain ISF
and consequently lower plasma Aβ levels (Fig. 1, Caf-
feine – Short-Term). This is exactly what we observed
in AD mice that were young adults (no brain Aβ de-
position), as well as aged AD mice (robust Aβ de-
position).
It is noteworthy that even caffeine treat-
ment every fourth day was sufﬁcient to provide a sus-
tained reduction in plasma Aβ levels to aged AD mice
over several months. Thus, the Aβ-reducing effects of
caffeine exceed its own half-life, which does not pre-
clude adenosine receptor-mediated effects of caffeine.
Indeed, adenosine receptor activation has been shown
to impact gene expression/signal transduction [3].
We recently reported that caffeine, when adminis-
tered in drinking water from young adulthood through
older age, protected APPsw mice from otherwise cer-

694
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
tain impairment and reduced their brain Aβ levels [9].
These results, suggestive that moderate daily intake of
caffeine (the human equivalent of 5 cups of coffee dai-
ly) could delay or reduce the riskof AD,underscore epi-
demiologic studies reporting that caffeine is protective
against both AD [7] and cognitive impairment associ-
ated with normal aging [5,6,8]. In a new study [12], we
show that this same caffeine treatment paradigm, when
given for two months to cognitively-impaired APPsw
mice, reverses their working memory impairment to
normal levels. We further report that this 2-month caf-
feine administration regime, given to aged APPsw mice
with pre-existing and substantial Aβ burdens, reduces
both soluble and deposited brain Aβ levels – in essence,
reversing their brain Aβ neuropathology.
Although
the mechanism(s) for caffeine-induced reversal of Aβ
deposition requires further investigation, we hypothe-
size that “chronic” caffeine suppresses Aβ production
long-term, resulting in consistently lower brain levels
of soluble ISF Aβ (Fig. 1, Caffeine – Long-Term). This
would then induce a ﬂux of insoluble Aβ out of the
deposited form and into the soluble form due to dy-
namic equilibrium. Newly-solubilized Aβ would then
be cleared into the plasma via both blood-brain-barrier
transport and bulk ﬂuid ﬂow. The dynamic equilibri-
um between soluble (ISF) and insoluble/deposited Aβ
in the brain is highlighted by our earlier work show-
ing that young adult and aged APPsw mice had similar
steady-state levels of ISF Aβ,but rapid inhibition of Aβ
production resulted in a two-fold longer Aβ half-life
in the aged, Aβ deposit-bearing mice [14]. We believe
this longer Aβ half-life is caused by solubilization of
a portion of the deposited Aβ pool due to the dynamic
ISF Aβ ↔deposited Aβ equilibirum.
In contrast to caffeine’s clear ability to reduce brain
Aβ levels throughchronictwo-monthtreatmentto aged
Tg mice, these same mice did not have signiﬁcantly re-
duced Aβ levels in their plasma. However, correlation
analysis revealed not only a strong inverse correlation
between plasma caffeine levels and plasma Aβ levels
in these aged Tg mice, but also a differential effect of
high versus low plasma caffeine levels; aged Tg mice
with high plasma caffeine levels had signiﬁcantly re-
duced plasma Aβ levels compared to those with low
plasma caffeine levels. Thus, whether or not a chronic
reduction in plasma Aβ levels occurs in aged Tg mice
would appear to be dependent on plasma caffeine lev-
els. Our elucidation of the same inverse correlation be-
tween plasma caffeine and plasma Aβ in young adult
Tg mice given a single caffeine treatment indicates that
this relationship transcends: 1) length of caffeine treat-
ment; 2) age of AD mouse recipient; and 3) whether or
not Aβ plaques are present. Indeed, given the fact that
plasma caffeine concentrationsin both age groups were
well within physiologic range, it would not be surpris-
ing for a similar inverse relationship between plasma
caffeine and plasma Aβ to be present in humans. In the
context that caffeine suppresses γ-secretase [9,12], the
reduced plasma Aβ1−40 levels seen in our aged APPsw
mice with higher plasma caffeine levels is consistent
with the reported reduction of plasma Aβ levels in AD
patients following a similar 6-week treatment with a
γ-secretase inhibitor [29].
For aged APPsw mice, strong correlations were evi-
dent between Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 levels (both soluble
and insoluble) in hippocampus and cortex irrespective
of caffeine treatment. Moreover, we have found brain
Aβ levels from aged APPsw mice to be strongly corre-
lated with cognitive impairment [12,23–25]. Thus, our
prior work has established an intimate and presumably
causative association between “brain” Aβ levels and
cognitive impairment. In sharp contrast, results from
the present study in the aged APPsw mice clearly show
that no such relationship exists between “plasma” Aβ
levels and cognitive performance. Furthermore, plas-
ma Aβ levels in these mice were not correlated with
any of eight brain Aβ measures. We conclude that, at
least in aged AD transgenic mice, plasma Aβ levels
are not an accurate index of soluble or insoluble brain
Aβ levels, nor are they an accurate index of cognitive
performance. This conclusion is consistent with a pre-
vious study in old APP transgenic mice [30], as well as
a recent report showing that plasma Aβ levels in AD
patients did not correlate with Aβ levels measured in
neocortex following death [31] nor with brain Aβ bur-
den as measured in vivo with amyloid imaging [32]. As
with plasma Aβ, we also foundno correlationsbetween
plasma caffeine concentrations and brain Aβ levels or
cognitive performance. Thus, higher plasma caffeine
levels were associated with lower plasma Aβ levels,
but were not reﬂective of brain Aβ levels or cognitive
performance.
From the present studies involving several AD trans-
genic lines, it is apparent that baseline plasma levels
of Aβ remain relatively stable during aging and irre-
spective of APPsw versus APPsw+PS1 transgenicity
(Figs 2 and 4). This ﬁnding suggests either close reg-
ulation of plasma Aβ in AD transgenic mice or lim-
ited/saturable Aβ transport into the blood. Regarding
the latter, we propose that during aging in AD mice,
there is a limit to the amount of Aβ that can be trans-
ported out of the brain and into plasma. After this lim-

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
695
ited transport capacity is reached, any additional Aβ
would remain in the brain and “stored” in Aβ deposits
through the dynamic Aβ equilibrium present with ISF
Aβ (Fig. 1).
The ability of plasma Aβ levels to be predictive of
impending AD cognitive impairment in humans is cur-
rently unresolved,with some studies reportingthat high
plasma Aβ1−40 levels are indicative of increased AD
risk [33] and others showing no predictive ability of
plasma Aβ for progression to AD [34]. Results from
the present study are consistent with the latter of these
assertions in that baseline plasma Aβ levels remained
essentially unchanged during aging in our inbred AD
transgenic mice (compare control Aβ levels in Fig. 2A,
B, D, and F), yet these mice develop robust brain Aβ
pathology and become cognitively impaired as they
age. The question nonetheless remains: Are studies
involving the predictive value of plasma Aβ equivo-
cal because the assays being utilized are inadequate,
or is plasma Aβ simply just not a good biomarker for
AD? Indeed, some laboratories are focusing on signal-
ing proteins and intercellular communication factors,
rather than plasma Aβ, as potential biomarkers for AD.
A notable recent study employing this strategy eluci-
dated a set of 18 signaling proteins in plasma that col-
lectively were highly accurate in classifying subjects as
aged normal or AD [35].
Our measurement of plasma caffeine and theo-
phylline levels from aged APPsw mice given two
months of caffeine treatment underscore the human
relevance and physiologic signiﬁcance of the caffeine
treatment in this long-term study. At the caffeine con-
centration in drinking water that was employed, plasma
caffeine levels averaged 26 µM, equivalent to the plas-
ma caffeine concentration expected in humans follow-
ing intake of several cups of coffee [3]. This caffeine
concentration is very close to the 20 µM concentration
that we found to be optimal in our N2a cell culture
studies for suppression of Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42 pro-
duction, although caffeine concentrations in the much
lower nM range were also effective [9]. Predictably,
plasma theophylline levels were tightly correlated with
plasma caffeine levels. As with plasma caffeine levels,
however,no correlations where evident betweenplasma
theophylline and plasma Aβ or cognitive performance.
As one of several active metabolites of caffeine, theo-
phylline may be responsible for a signiﬁcant portion
of the cognitive, neuropathologic, and neurochemical
beneﬁts of caffeine. This premise is underscoredby the
fact that caffeine metabolites such as theophylline have
a considerably longer half-life than caffeine. Indeed,
brain concentrations of theophylline in mice following
long-term caffeine ingestion are usually higher than
those of caffeine [36]. We are currently exploring the
contributionof such caffeine metabolites to the beneﬁts
currently being attributed to caffeine in our AD mice.
No correlations were found between plasma Aβ lev-
els and plasma/brain cytokine levels, suggesting their
independence of one another. Although plasma caf-
feine levels were also not correlated with plasma cy-
tokines, a clear reduction in hippocampal inﬂamma-
tory cytokines was evident for caffeine-treated mice
with higher plasma caffeine levels compared to those
with lower caffeine levels.
This was not only also
true for plasma theophylline levels, but higher plas-
ma theophylline levels were strongly and consistent-
ly correlated with lower inﬂammatory cytokine levels
in both hippocampus and cortex; these theophylline
ﬁndings suggest a more profound interaction between
this caffeine metabolite and brain cytokines than caf-
feine itself, perhaps due to the aforementioned higher
brain concentrations of theophylline [36]. The abil-
ity of caffeine and theophylline to provide beneﬁcial
anti-inﬂammatory effects in the brain of AD mice is
consistent with a large body of data supportive of their
anti-inﬂammatory capacities [20] and, as such, could
represent a potent “non-amyloidogenic” mechanism of
caffeine action that may contribute to its ability to pro-
tect against/reverse cognitive impairment and synaptic
dysfunction. Other such beneﬁcial mechanisms of caf-
feine action in AD mice (and perhaps in human AD)
include the antioxidant actions caffeine [37], its abili-
ty to block disruptions of the blood-brain barrier [38],
and its well-established antagonism of brain A1 and/or
A2a adenosine receptors [1,2,39,40]. Indeed, adeno-
sine receptor antagonism may be central to most or all
of the beneﬁcial actions of caffeine against AD and any
combination of “caffeinergic” actions may collectively
provide the cognitive beneﬁts we have documented in
AD mice.
Anti-AD drugs currently on the market (cholineste-
rase inhibitors and NMDA receptor antagonists) have
minimal beneﬁts and do not appear to address AD
pathogenesis. Although caffeine is the most widely
consumed psychoactive agent in the world, its intake in
Western countries decreases substantially duringaging.
Giventhat: 1) bloodcaffeineconcentrationsequilibrate
almost instantaneouslywith brain caffeine levels [3]; 2)
caffeine appears to suppress AD pathogenesis [9,12];
3) caffeine has few, if any, deleterious side effects for
most individuals [10]; and 4) caffeine is readily avail-
able and inexpensive, therapeutic actions of this psy-

696
C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
choactive agent against AD could provide immediate
beneﬁts. Based on the robust protective [9] and treat-
ment effects [12] of caffeine that we have observed in
AD transgenic mice, Phase II clinical trials involving
acute caffeine administration are currently in progress.
To our knowledge, no prior studies have investigated
the effect of acute or chronic caffeine administration
on plasma biomarkers related to AD. It is important
to note that this report’s acute caffeine administration
studies involved AD transgenic mice “na¨ıve” to caf-
feine, whereas clinical trials involve many occasional
or habitual caffeine users. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to
predict the impact of acute caffeine administration in
these ongoing human trials.
To summarize, the present report demonstrates that
caffeine can acutely decrease brain and plasma Aβ lev-
els, as well as reduce brain Aβ deposition and im-
prove cognitive function following chronic administra-
tion. As such, caffeine appears to have excellent po-
tential as a safe and effective therapeutic against AD.
We also provide evidence from multiple studies and
methodologies indicating that plasma Aβ is not an ac-
curate index of brain Aβ levels/deposition or cognitive
performance in aged AD mice.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supportedby grants to G.W.A. and
H.P. within the NIA-designated Florida Alzheimer’s
Disease Research Center (P50AG025711), AG029524
(J.R.C.), AG13956 (D.M.H.), Cure Alzheimer’s Fund
(D.M.H. and J.R.C.),
and funds from the Byrd
Alzheimer’s Center & Research Institute.
REFERENCES
[1]
Fisone G, Borgkvist A, Usiello A (2004) Caffeine as a psy-
chomotor stimulant: mechanism of action. Cell Mol Life Sci
61, 857-872.
[2]
Daly J (2007) Caffeine analogs: biomedical impact. Cell Mol
Life Sci 64, 2153-2169.
[3]
Fredholm B, B¨attig K, Holm´en J, Nehlig A, Zvartau E (1999)
Actions of caffeine in the brain with special reference to factors
that contribute to its widespread use. Pharmacol Rev 51, 83-
133.
[4]
Higdon J, Frei B (2006) Coffee and health: a review of recent
human research. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 46, 101-123.
[5]
Ritchie K, Carri`ere I, de Mendonca A, Portet F, Dartigues J,
Rouaud O, Barberger-Gateau P, Ancelin M (2007) The neuro-
protective effects of caffeine: a prospective population study
(the Three City Study). Neurology 69, 536-545.
[6]
van Gelder B, Buijsse B, Tijhuis M, Kalmijn S, Giampaoli
S, Nissinen A, Kromhout D (2007) Coffee consumption is
inversely associated with cognitive decline in elderly European
men: the FINE Study. Eur J Clin Nutr 61, 226-232.
[7]
Maia L, de Mendonc¸a A (2002) Does caffeine intake protect
from Alzheimer’s disease? Eur J Neurol 9, 377-382.
[8]
Rosso A, Lippa C, Mossey J (2008) Caffeine: Neuroprotec-
tive Functions in Cognition and Alzheimer’s Disease. Am J
Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 23, 417-422.
[9]
Arendash G, Schleif W, Rezai-Zadeh K, Jackson E, Zacharia
L, Cracchiolo J, Shippy D, Tan J (2006) Caffeine protects
Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment and reduces
brain beta-amyloid production. Neuroscience 142, 941-952.
[10]
Nawrot P, Jordan S, Eastwood J, Rotstein J, Hugenholtz A,
Feeley M (2003) Effects of caffeine on human health. Food
Addit Contam 20, 1-30.
[11]
Lopez-Garcia E, van Dam R, Li T, Rodriguez-Artalejo F, Hu F
(2008) The relationship of coffee consumption with mortality.
Ann Intern Med 148, 904-914.
[12]
Arendash GW, Mori T, Cao C, Mamcarz M, Runfeldt M, Dick-
son A, Rezai-Zadehe K, Tane J, Citron Ba, Lin X, Echeverria
V, Potter H (2009) Caffeine reverses cognitive impairment and
decreases brain amyloid-β levels in aged Alzheimer’s disease
mice. J Alzheimers Dis 17, 661-680.
[13]
Bateman R, Munsell L, Morris J, Swarm R, Yarasheski K,
Holtzman D (2006) Human amyloid-beta synthesis and clear-
ance rates as measured in cerebrospinal ﬂuid in vivo. Nat Med
12, 856-861.
[14]
Cirrito J, May P, O’Dell M, Taylor J, Parsadanian M, Cramer
J, Audia J, Nissen J, Bales K, Paul S, DeMattos R, Holtzman
D (2003) In vivo assessment of brain interstitial ﬂuid with
microdialysis reveals plaque-associated changes in amyloid-
beta metabolism and half-life. J Neurosci 23, 8844-8853.
[15]
Cirrito J, Kang J, Lee J, Stewart F, Verges D, Silverio L, Bu G,
Mennerick S, Holtzman D (2008) Endocytosis is required for
synaptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo.
Neuron 58, 42-51.
[16]
Ethell D, Shippy D, Cao C, Cracchiolo J, Runfeldt M, Blake
B, Arendash G (2006) Abeta-speciﬁc T-cells reverse cognitive
decline and synaptic loss in Alzheimer’s mice. Neurobiol Dis
23, 351-361.
[17]
Cracchiolo J, Mori T, Nazian S, Tan J, Potter H, Arendash
G (2007) Enhanced cognitive activity–over and above social
or physical activity–is required to protect Alzheimer’s mice
against cognitive impairment, reduce Abeta deposition, and
increase synaptic immunoreactivity. Neurobiol Learn Mem 88,
277-294.
[18]
Mori T, Town T, Tan J, Yada N, Horikoshi Y, Yamamoto J,
Shimoda T, Kamanaka Y, Tateishi N, Asano T (2006) Arundic
acid ameliorates cerebral amyloidosis and gliosis in Alzheimer
transgenic mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 318, 571-578.
[19]
Tan J, Town T, Crawford F, Mori T, DelleDonne A, Crescentini
R, Obregon D, Flavell R, Mullan M (2002) Role of CD40
ligand in amyloidosis in transgenic Alzheimer’s mice. Nat
Neurosci 5, 1288-1293.
[20]
Horrigan L, Kelly J, Connor T (2004) Caffeine sup-
presses TNF-alpha production via activation of the cyclic
AMP/protein kinase A pathway. Int Immunopharmacol 4,
1409-1417.
[21]
Cirrito J, Yamada K, Finn M, Sloviter S, Bales K, May P,
Schoepp D, Paul S, Mennerick S, Holtzman D (2005) Synaptic
activity regulates interstitial ﬂuid amyloid-beta levels in vivo.
Neuron 48, 913-922.

C. Cao et al. / Caffeine Suppresses Amyloid-β Levels in Plasma and Brain of Alzheimer’s Disease Transgenic Mice
697
[22]
Arendash G, Gordon M, Diamond D, Austin L, Hatcher J,
Jantzen P, DiCarlo G, Wilcock D, Morgan D (2001) Behav-
ioral assessment of Alzheimer’s transgenic mice following
long-term Abeta vaccination: task speciﬁcity and correlations
between Abeta deposition and spatial memory. DNA Cell Biol
20, 737-744.
[23]
Arendash G, King D, Gordon M, Morgan D, Hatcher J, Hope
C, Diamond D (2001) Progressive, age-related behavioral im-
pairments in transgenic mice carrying both mutant amyloid
precursor protein and presenilin-1 transgenes. Brain Res 891,
42-53.
[24]
Leighty R, Nilsson L, Potter H, Costa D, Low M, Bales K, Paul
S, Arendash G (2004) Use of multimetric statistical analysis
to characterize and discriminate between the performance of
four Alzheimer’s transgenic mouse lines differing in Abeta
deposition. Behav Brain Res 153, 107-121.
[25]
Arendash G, Jensen M, Salem N, Hussein N, Cracchiolo J,
Dickson A, Leighty R, Potter H (2007) A diet high in omega-3
fatty acids does not improve or protect cognitive performance
in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Neuroscience 149, 286-302.
[26]
Tuppo E, Arias H (2005) The role of inﬂammation in
Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 37, 289-305.
[27]
Kandimalla K, Curran G, Holasek S, Gilles E, Wengenack T,
Poduslo J (2005) Pharmacokinetic analysis of the blood-brain
barrier transport of 125I-amyloid beta protein 40 in wild-type
and Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice (APP,PS1) and its
implications for amyloid plaque formation. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 313, 1370-1378.
[28]
Saido T (2003) Aβ Metabolism and Alzheimer’s Disease
(Landes Bioscience).
[29]
Siemers E, Quinn J, Kaye J, Farlow M, Porsteinsson A, Tar-
iot P, Zoulnouni P, Galvin J, Holtzman D, Knopman D, Sat-
terwhite J, Gonzales C, Dean R, May P (2006) Effects of a
gamma-secretase inhibitor in a randomized study of patients
with Alzheimer disease. Neurology 66, 602-604.
[30]
DeMattos R, Bales K, Cummins D, Paul S, Holtzman D (2002)
Brain to plasma amyloid-beta efﬂux: a measure of brain amy-
loid burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Science
295, 2264-2267.
[31]
Freeman S, Raju S, Hyman B, Frosch M, Irizarry M (2007)
Plasma Abeta levels do not reﬂect brain Abeta levels. J Neu-
ropathol Exp Neurol 66, 264-271.
[32]
Fagan A, Mintun M, Mach R, Lee S, Dence C, Shah A,
LaRossa G, Spinner M, Klunk W, Mathis C, DeKosky S, Mor-
ris J, Holtzman D (2006) Inverse relation between in vivo amy-
loid imaging load and cerebrospinal ﬂuid Abeta42 in humans.
Ann Neurol 59, 512-519.
[33]
van Oijen M, Hofman A, Soares H, Koudstaal P, Breteler M
(2006) Plasma Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-42) and the risk of
dementia: a prospective case-cohort study. Lancet Neurol 5,
655-660.
[34]
Hansson O, Zetterberg H, Blennow K (2008) Evaluation of
plasma Abeta40 and Abeta42 as predictors of conversion to
Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive impair-
ment. Neurobiol Aging, in press.
[35]
Ray S, Britschgi M, Herbert C, Takeda-Uchimura Y, Boxer
A, Blennow K, Friedman L, Galasko D, Jutel M, Karydas A,
Kaye J, Leszek J, Miller B, Minthon L, Quinn J, Rabinovici
G, Robinson W, Sabbagh M, So Y, Sparks D, Tabaton M,
Tinklenberg J, Yesavage J, Tibshirani R, Wyss-Coray T (2007)
Classiﬁcation and prediction of clinical Alzheimer’s diagnosis
based on plasma signaling proteins. Nat Med 13, 1359-1362.
[36]
Johansson B, Georgiev V, Kuosmanen T, Fredholm B (1996)
Long-term treatment with some methylxanthines decreases the
susceptibility to bicuculline- and pentylenetetrazol-induced
seizures in mice. Relationship to c-fos expression and receptor
binding. Eur J Neurosci 8, 2447-2458.
[37]
Azam S, Hadi N, Khan N, Hadi S (2003) Antioxidant and
prooxidant properties of caffeine, theobromine and xanthine.
Med Sci Monit 9, BR325-330.
[38]
Chen X, Gawryluk J, Wagener J, Ghribi O, Geiger J (2008)
Caffeine blocks disruption of blood brain barrier in a rabbit
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinﬂammation 5, 12.
[39]
Dall’Igna O, Fett P, Gomes M, Souza D, Cunha R, Lara D
(2007) Caffeine and adenosine A(2a) receptor antagonists pre-
vent beta-amyloid (25-35)-induced cognitive deﬁcits in mice.
Exp Neurol 203, 241-245.
[40]
Cunha G, Canas P, Melo C, Hockemeyer J, M¨uller C, Oliveira
C, Cunha R (2008) Adenosine A2A receptor blockade prevents
memory dysfunction caused by beta-amyloid peptides but not
by scopolamine or MK-801. Exp Neurol 210, 776-781.
