Editorial
Coffee and health: what we still don’t know
Ahmed El-Sohemy
Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Coffee is a major source of caffeine, one of the most widely
consumed stimulants in the world. Coffee also contains many
other substances, such as polyphenols, diterpenoids, and trace
minerals, that have been linked to various health conditions. The
consumption of either caffeinated or decaffeinated coffee has
been associated with increases and decreases in the risk of a
number of chronic diseases. In the present issue of the Journal,
Hang et al. (1) used several biomarkers to explore potential
mechanisms underlying the putative protective effects of coffee
in 2 large, well-characterized cohorts: the Nurses’ Health Study
and the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study. They found that
coffee consumption was associated with favorable profiles of
several biomarkers in key metabolic and inflammatory pathways,
including some that are specifically linked to cardiovascular
disease. Many of the associations observed were similar for caf-
feinated and decaffeinated coffee, suggesting that the effects are
not due to caffeine. Moreover, it appears that anti-inflammatory
pathways might be driving many of the health-related effects of
coffee. What remains unknown, however, is what components
of coffee confer such benefits. One approach that can be used
to home in on the relevant bioactive(s) is to include genetic
variants affecting the metabolism or response to those bioactives,
as proposed over a decade ago (2). Indeed, another study in this
issue of the Journal did just that. Using prospective data from the
UK Biobank, Zhou and Hypponen (3) evaluated the association
between habitual coffee consumption and cardiovascular disease
risk, and incorporated genetic markers of caffeine metabolism
to determine the contribution of caffeine to this association. The
authors identified a U-shaped association between coffee intake
and cardiovascular disease that was not modified by the genetic
markers tested. These findings contrast those of Cornelis et al.
(4), who first reported that variation in cytochrome P450 family
1 subfamily A member 2 (CYP1A2), which affects the rate of
caffeine metabolism and modifies the association between coffee
consumption and the risk of myocardial infarction. Those earlier
findings have since been extended to hypertension (5), impaired
fasting glucose (6), and blood pressure (7), where in all cases
coffee or caffeine was associated with adverse outcomes only
in individuals with the CYP1A2 genotype associated with slow
metabolism of caffeine. As such, the lack of a modifying effect
of genetic differences in caffeine metabolism observed by Zhou
and Hypponen seems unexpected (3). A recent study that used
the same UK Biobank population found that coffee is inversely
associated with overall mortality regardless of genetic differences
affecting caffeine metabolism, although the association was
only marginally significant for cardiovascular mortality (8). The
disparate findings between the 2 studies (3, 8), despite using
data from the same UK Biobank cohort and incorporating similar
genetic risk scores based on the same genome-wide association
study (9), is puzzling. Importantly, both studies have significant
limitations that preclude a definitive conclusion about the role of
genetics in modifying the association between coffee and health.
For instance, Loftfield et al. (8) included decaffeinated coffee in
the analyses, thus attenuating any effects of genetic differences in
caffeine metabolism on the outcomes measured. Although both
studies examined the role of CYP1A2, they also used genetic
risk scores that have yet to be shown to predict differences
in the rate of caffeine metabolism (3, 8). They also did not
consider all sources of caffeine, which results in misclassification
of the exposure of interest. Zhou and Hypponen (3) state that
their prospective analysis minimizes the possibility of reverse
causation. However, such a design reflects long-term intake, and
coffee has distinct acute effects on cardiovascular phenotypes,
such as blood pressure, that may affect its contribution to
cardiovascular outcomes (10). Acute effects are better captured
by case-control (4), or intervention (7), study designs. The
previous study, showing that CYP1A2 modifies the association
between coffee and myocardial infarction, found the effect was
greatest in younger cases (4), suggesting an important modifying
effect of age and that a lack of effect in an older cohort could
be due to a healthy survivor effect. The authors found that
a gene-coffee-age interaction did not reach the threshold for
significance (P ≥0.11, data not shown), but a stratified analysis
by median age should have been shown considering previous
findings (4). As such, the modifying effects of CYP1A2 cannot
be ruled out. Future studies that aim to focus on caffeine by
incorporating the CYP1A2 genotype into the study design, as
Zhou and Hypponen have done, must also include all sources of
this bioactive. Otherwise, any estimate of the modifying effect of
genetics will be affected by the imprecise estimate of exposure
to caffeine. Studies that seek to better understand the role of
other bioactives in coffee would be greatly strengthened by
incorporating genetic variants that affect their metabolism or are
potential targets of their action (2).
AE-S is the Founder and Chief Science Officer of, and holds shares in,
Nutrigenomix Inc., which provides genetic testing for personalized nutrition
to healthcare professionals.
Address correspondence to AE-S (e-mail: a.el.sohemy@utoronto.ca).
First published online 0, 2019; doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqy368.
Am J Clin Nutr 2019;00:1–2. Printed in USA. © 2019 American Society for Nutrition. All rights reserved.
1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajcn/nqy368/5369464 by Tarrant County College user on 05 March 2019

2
Editorial
References
1. Hang D, Kværner AS, Ma W, Hu Y, Tabung FK, Nan H, Hu Z, Shen H,
Mucci LA, Chan AT, et al. Coffee consumption and plasma biomarkers
of metabolic and inflammatory pathways in US health professionals.
Am J Clin Nutr; In press.
2. Cornelis MC, El-Sohemy A. Coffee, caffeine, and coronary heart
disease. Curr Opin Lipidol 2007;18(1):13–19.
3. Zhou A, Hypponen E. Long-term coffee consumption, caffeine
metabolism genetics, and risk of cardiovascular disease: a prospective
analysis of up to 347,077 individuals and 8368 causes. Am J Clin Nutr;
In press.
4. Cornelis MC, El-Sohemy A, Kabagambe EK, Campos H. Coffee,
CYP1A2
genotype,
and
risk
of
myocardial
infarction.
JAMA
2006;295(10):1135–41.
5. Palatini P, Ceolotto G, Ragazzo F, Dorigatti F, Saladini F, Papparella
I, Mos L, Zanata G, Santonastaso M. CYP1A2 genotype modifies
the association between coffee intake and the risk of hypertension. J
Hypertens 2009;27(8):1594–601.
6. Palatini P, Benetti E, Mos L, Garavelli G, Mazzer A, Cozzio S,
Fania C, Casiglia E. Association of coffee consumption and CYP1A2
polymorphism with risk of impaired fasting glucose in hypertensive
patients. Eur J Epidemiol 2015;30(3):209–17.
7. Soares RN, Schneider A, Valle SC, Schenkel PC. The influence of
CYP1A2 genotype in the blood pressure response to caffeine ingestion
is affected by physical activity status and caffeine consumption level.
Vascul Pharmacol 2018;106:67–73.
8. Loftfield E, Cornelis MC, Caporaso N, Yu K, Sinha R, Freedman N.
Association of coffee drinking with mortality by genetic variation in
caffeine metabolism. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178(8):1086–97.
9. Cornelis MC, Kacprowski T, Menni C, Gustafsson S, Pivin E, Adamski
J, Artati A, Eap CB, Ehret G, Friedrich N, et al. Genome-wide
association study of caffeine metabolites provides new insights to
caffeine metabolism and dietary caffeine-consumption behavior. Hum
Mol Genet 2016;25(24):ddw334.
10. Guessous I, Eap CB, Bochud M. Blood pressure in relation to coffee
and caffeine consumption. Curr Hypertens Rep 2014;16(9):468.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/advance-article-abstract/doi/10.1093/ajcn/nqy368/5369464 by Tarrant County College user on 05 March 2019
