COTEBA FIELD EXTENSION OFFICER COMPETENCIES 
OBJECTIVE 
COMPETENCY:  KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS ELEMENTS 
1. Guide and demonstrate (to Lead 
Farmers and other growers) correct 
planting, maintenance, harvesting 
and processing coffee to improve 
small scale farming practices, yields 
and quality. 
Nursery 
1. 
Identifies suitable varieties of coffee for growing conditions. 
2. 
Identifies site and creates structure of nursery, timing 
appropriately 
3. 
Creates soil medium, mixes fertilizer, fills sleeves       
4. 
Handles and plants seeds to produce healthy seedlings; has 
spray program for nursery 
5. 
Controls appropriate nursery conditions and nurturing seedlings. 
Planting 
6. 
Chooses and prepares land by examine growing conditions, soil 
types, soil analysis, plant spacing, planting station preparation, 
mulching and irrigation. 
7. 
Appraises and decides on shade and shelter conditions before 
planting. 
8. 
Intercrops appropriately. 
9. 
Manages seedlings:  
a. 
Planting seedlings at appropriate stage and maintaining 
seedlings through proper cleaning, mulching, feeding, 
weed control;  
b. 
Identifying poor seedlings that should be replaced; 
c. 
Carrying out routine work on disciplined schedule:  
pruning, checking for pests and diseases, maintaining 
nutrition and moisture, weeding, spraying 
Maintenance of Mature Coffee 
10. Prunes coffee correctly. 
11. Applies fertilisers on regular schedule. 
12. Recognises main coffee pests:  White headed stem borer (frass 
and larvae, too), antestia, leaf miner, snout beetle, white grub, 
cutworm, dusty surface beetle, berry moth; also is aware of minor 
pests. 
13. Identifies and administers appropriate solutions for coffee pests. 
14. Recognises main coffee diseases:  Leaf rust, cercospora, 
fusarium, coffee berry disease, root rot (armillaria mellea) and 
damping off. 
15. Identifies and administers appropriate remedies for coffee 
diseases. 
16. Recognises physiological disorders, and remedies when possible:  
Berry squeeze, hot & cold disease, crinkly leaf, sunscorch, 
overbearing die back, fertilizer burn, and nutritional deficiencies. 
Harvesting and Processing 
17. Harvests coffee at the correct stage with adequate picking 
means; pre-grades in field; monitors conditions and timing of 
cherry from field to processing station. 
18. Pulps coffee completely without damage to beans; pre-grades a 
second time. 
19. Ferments (especially without over-fermenting), washes and wet-
sorts coffee correctly. 
20. Dries coffee correctly and attentively. 
21. Sorts and stores coffee to ensure preservation of quality and 
prevention of contamination. 
2. Explain and plan for natural and water 
resource management in the project’s 
growing areas. 
1. Chooses lands conscientiously, analyzing environmental 
conditions. 
2. Prepares and maintains land using precautions and efforts to 
eliminate erosion. 
3. Examines and investigates tree varieties for shade and 
windbreaks, opting for indigenous trees whenever possible. 
4. Lists organic fertiliser (pigeon pea leaves, chicken and other 
manure) and pest control (aromatic plants, wood ash, soap 
solutions) options and utilizes whenever possible. 
5. Promotes integrated soil fertility management.  
6. Processes coffee with conscientious usage of water and disposal 
of effluent. 

3. Exhibit production-related and 
financial record-keeping for farmers 
to meet contracts and perform 
business-oriented production and 
marketing. 
1. 
Keeps detailed records of coffee trees and land usage. 
2. 
Records and schedules maintenance of coffee trees:  fertilizing 
and pest/disease control, including listing of materials and 
methods used. 
3. 
Records weights of coffees produced and deliveries to ZCM. 
4. 
Organizes and files receipts and paperwork from every individual, 
company and entity with which business is done, and keeps 
these in a secure place. 
5. 
Develops budgets for continued increase of coffee production and 
long term sustainability. 
6. 
Applies basic financial planning methods to ensure welfare of 
family and farm and repay loans. 
7. 
Collaborates with other growers to promote development of the 
coffee industry as a whole. 
Identifies and Classifies Premium and Specialty Coffee 
8. 
Cooperates with COTEBA and ZCM on marketing efforts. 
9. 
Utilizes the Zimbabwe Coffee Mill quality standards chart for 
green grading. 
10. Explains rationale for coffee grading and producing premium and 
specialty grade coffee. 
11. Tastes general differences between the major grades of coffee 
when cupped at a standard roast level and brew strength. 
12. Identifies defects in green coffee; Discusses reasons for defects 
(growing, processing, or storage), proposes and plans solutions 
to eliminate defects and improve quality. 
13. Uses Coffee Quality Institute (CQI) methods to discuss and score 
coffees. 
 
