Coffee for Athletes—The Natural Choice 
 
Coffee has long been considered an option to help boost a workout or sports performance. 
What is the science behind it?  The stimulatory effects of caffeine and caffeinated coffee  is probably not 
a surprise to you, but coffee for athletes has way more than just its caffeine content.  Scientists agree 
and research suggests that athletic performance can be improved with just a moderate amount of 
coffee consumption, for both endurance and perhaps even high-intensity type athletics.  Coffee helps 
with performance during the sports activity and with healing the body afterward. 
Coffee is known to help in several ways: 
• It holds off exhaustion 
• It reduces pain 
• It helps with endurance and high-intensity performance 
• It helps the body recover more quickly from exercise 
 
Today, the overall body of scientific evidence on this topic supports the fact that there are many 
performance benefits that can be seen across a range of sports, endurance and some high-performance 
activities, with just a moderate consumption of coffee (about 2-2 cups of coffee, which has 
approximately 200-300 mg of caffeine) 8, 9. Studies have found performance enhancements in sports 
such as running, team and racquet sports 10-12, cycling, skiing, lifting 13, swimming, and rowing 14.  
One side issue we also explored, though, was the topic of caffeine as a “performance-enhancing 
substance”.  We looked up the various places that there are rules regarding caffeine levels during formal 
sporting events. 
 
Caffeine and Wakefulness 
 
The effects of coffee and caffeine on reducing fatigue and increasing alertness have 
been known for centuries. These properties since have been sought by certain professions, such as long-
haul truck drivers, medical practitioners, members of the military forces, athletes, and other populations 
who need to fight fatigue or prolong their capacity to undertake their occupational activities.  
The predominance of evidence and widely accepted scientific understanding is that for coffee, 
the actor on sports performance is largely caffeine. Most of the published research studies on exercise 
performance do focus on caffeine, with only a few considering the whole, complex beverage of coffee 20-
23.  The caffeine though, is multi-faceted. 
Technically, caffeine has an antagonist effect on the adenosine receptors in the brain 24. This is 
the pathway that leads to the production of adrenalin, stimulates energy production, and improves 
blood flow. At the same time, this blocking of adenosine receptors reduces fatigue and perception of 
exertion and even pain, which is proposed to lead to athletic performance improvements 22. 

Caffeine may simply make you less tired during exercise, allowing you to go further, longer, and 
harder than without it.  It may also modulate what scientists call “central fatigue”, a type of fatigue 
caused by neurochemical changes in the brain associated with prolonged exercise, and in turn influence 
ratings of perceived exertion, perceived pain, and levels of vigor, all of which are likely to lead to 
improvements in performance 25  
 
Coffee may reduce Pain 
There is also evidence that caffeine, as an adenosine receptor antagonist, reduces pain. It is well 
known in the medical field that it produces adjuvant analgesic properties when in combination with 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen (Tylenol) and has been also shown to effect 
nerves in the body 26. In this way, caffeine may also reduce the sensations of pain associated with 
muscle work or physical activity 24. 
In addition, we know that coffee offers other advantages that can be beneficial for athletes, 
mostly leading from the other natural compounds found in coffee, called polyphenols. These 
compounds have been linked to antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity in the body15, 16. One group 
of notable polyphenols in coffee, called chlorogenic acids, have been linked to many health benefits in 
different sites in the body17. These compounds are typically the highest in lighter or medium roasted 
coffees, as they degrade during the roasting process15. Chlorogenic acids and other polyphenols have 
been suggested to positively contribute to lowering inflammation in the body4, 18, which can be an 
important consideration of novice and professional athletes alike.  
Chlorogenic acid lactones have received attention because of their potential effects on brain 
function independent of the pharmacologic effects of caffeine. They exhibit opiate receptor binding 
activity with characteristics similar to those of opiate antagonists, although these are relatively weak in 
vitro, further studies need to be conducted with normal coffee consumption.37 
 
Coffee can improve endurance performance and high-intensity sports 
There is a lot of evidence and many scientific studies to back up that caffeine ingestion improves 
endurance sports performance. This idea has been studied since the early 1900’s 6 and was first 
popularized in the late 1970’s 7. In 1978, a scientist named Costill and his colleagues were the first to 
demonstrate that caffeine taken an hour before exercise increased endurance 7. 
Again, common research points to coffee’s effect on adenosine receptors in the brain. These 
studies show a pretty consistent benefit in endurance exercise by decreasing perceived exertion and 
increasing time to exhaustion 27. In a large review considering 21 studies this topic, the amount of 
caffeine commonly shown to improve endurance performance was between 3 and 6 mg·kg-1 body 
mass28.  
A review of studies on endurance performance in 2016 included 9 studies that specified the 
effect of caffeine in coffee. They noted significant improvements in endurance performance in five of 
nine studies, which were on average 24.2% over controls for time to exhaustion trials. They suggested 
that there was moderate evidence supporting the use of coffee as an aid to improve performance in 

both endurance cycling and running sports 23. This much (over 20%) of a performance enhancement is 
much larger than the usual margins reported in caffeine studies, and is definitely worth further 
investigation.  
The 2011, The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) reported an opinion on caffeine’s effect 
on endurance exercise performance. They concluded that a credible “cause and effect relationship” had 
been established between the consumption of caffeine and an increase in endurance performance 29. 
There is also promising research on the effects of coffee on short-term, high-intensity physical 
performance.  A study specifically using coffee by Wiles and others 21 found that the ingestion of coffee 
lead to an increased speed for the 1500 meter run, and that the speed of the “finishing burst” was 
enhanced. Other studies have shown convincing results that caffeine enhances intensity in swimming, 
sprint cycling, and team sports performance 10, 30.   
One notable study that focused on coffee found significantly faster cycling performance times 
were similar for both caffeine and coffee. The study showed that coffee improved performance to the 
same extent as caffeine when compared to decaf coffee and placebo, 4.7% and 4.3% respectively 22. 
Certainly, more research should follow this and similar studies in order to elucidate the actual benefit of 
drinking coffee, as opposed to taking a sports supplement or caffeine pill! 
In a review of 25 studies on this topic conducted in 2010, 11 of 17 studies revealed significant 
improvements in team sports exercise and power-based sports with caffeine ingestion. Six of 11 studies 
revealed significant benefits of caffeine for resistance training. Other results were mixed- some studies 
showed decreased performance with caffeine ingestion when repeated bouts were completed 31.   
 
Coffee can help recover more quickly after sports 
In a more recent meta-analysis of 26 studies, the authors noted that caffeine’s effect on high-
intensity performance was explained by increases in ventilation, blood lactate, and blood glucose. 
Glycogen, the muscle's primary fuel source during exercise, is replenished more rapidly when athletes 
ingest both carbohydrate and caffeine following exhaustive exercise, new research shows. Athletes who 
ingested caffeine with carbohydrate had 66 percent more glycogen in their muscles four hours after 
finishing intense, glycogen-depleting exercise, compared to when they consumed carbohydrate alone, 
according to the study. 32. 
It is inevitable that athletes injure themselves from time to time.  Inflammation is a physiological 
response to tissue injury. The reduction of inflammation resulting in enhanced wound healing has been 
reported for chlorogenic acids. Oral administration of 5-CQA at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day accelerated 
wound healing and decreased lipid peroxidation products by reducing inflammatory responses and 
increasing antioxidant defense systems38.  
In a large study on mortality, researchers looked at coffee’s impact on health and longevity.  
They concluded that coffee favorably affected inflammation, lung function, insulin sensitivity, and 
depression, which also are related to recovery after intense athletic activity1. 
 

The legality of caffeine usage in elite athletic competitions 
How much does caffeine improve performance, exactly? The level of athletic performance 
improvement shown in scientific studies is on average between 1-3 percent, depending on the dose of 
caffeine and the intended physical activity 28. Doesn’t sound like much? Consider an elite athletic 
competition, such as the Olympics - when you are competing in elite endurance-type competitions, 3% 
can often mean the difference between the top five placements. Because of this, it is extremely 
common for professional athletes to include caffeine in their training and competition regimes. 
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) does not currently list caffeine as a banned substance. 
WADA did have caffeine on its list for three decades (specifically from 1984 – 2004), during which time, 
athletes could be thrown out of competition if their urine contained more than 12 micrograms per 
milliliter of caffeine. WADA ended up removing caffeine from the banned list because it decided that 
performance-enhancing doses were almost indistinguishable from what some people would consider 
“normal consumption”. Caffeine is just so ubiquitous in the world and especially the athletic community 
that they did not want to punish athletes for something that many would consider as ordinary daily 
consumption. An issue that complicates this was that monitoring and testing for caffeine is not precise 
because the rate of metabolism changes per person. Thus, the international Olympic Committee is not 
currently prohibiting caffeine.  
Therefore, since 2004 athletes have been able to freely sip coffee or consume caffeine by other 
methods, such as energy drinks or caffeine pills. After caffeine was dropped from the list, during the 
following four years caffeine was consistently found in approximately 74% of monitored athletes, 
illustrating that the use of caffeine is widespread in athletic populations 33. Today, it is still monitored, 
for only for tracking purposes. 
The US National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) still includes caffeine on their 2018-19 
list of banned drugs, making it one of the few organizations to still limit caffeine use in athletic 
competitions. They limit caffeine to a concentration of below 15 micrograms per milliliter in urine tests, 
which corresponds to about 500 mg of caffeine in the 2-3 hours prior to competing. Remember, a “cup” 
of brewed, black coffee can vary from about 75-250 mg, depending on the strength of the brew and size 
of the cup. This means that to be safe, college athletes should likely not consume more than 2 cups of 
coffee in the time before their competition. 
 
How can you include coffee in your athletic endeavors? 
Research has shown that drinking a moderate number (2-3) of cups of coffee prior to exercise is 
enough to show results. Specifically, 3 mg/kilo, or 3 mg/1.36 pounds dose would mean that a 180-pound 
athlete would want 145 mg of caffeine, which is equivalent to about 2-3 cups of drip coffee, depending 
on what size & strength of a brew you get. This is not an outrageous amount of coffee, but you may find 
that it has good results for you. In fact, some research suggests that a dose of as little as 200 mg (or about 
1-2 cups of coffee) can enhance your athletic performance 20. 
Of course, the body’s response to caffeine and coffee varies within each individual. Having two 
cups of coffee an hour before exercise might not feel right for you, and it is important to listen and respond 
to that. Some people may not like it as much, or may even find that it impairs their performance. Each 

individual person and athlete should determine whether or not they feel a difference with either a smaller 
or larger amount of coffee before a workout or competition. Studies have demonstrated that the impact 
of caffeine consumption on performance may differ between individuals, possibly due to polymorphisms 
within genes 34. One study that investigated this topic noted that specific gene polymorphisms significantly 
affected an athlete’s response to caffeine in terms of their sports performance, as measured by cycling 
time 35. In fact, they found that certain genotypes actually did not respond, or had a negative response, 
to caffeine as an athletic stimulant, meaning, they actually performed worse with the caffeine.  
Added to the already known and established benefits of coffee consumption, such as living 
longer1, reducing the risk of diabetes2 liver disease3, and improving cardiovascular health4, 5. Drinking 
coffee has even been found to be associated with weight reduction and lower rates of obesity4.   
This is great evidence for listening to your own body and making sure you drink the healthiest 
coffee possible for your own sport needs. In the end, even if you don’t feel a large difference in your 
athletic endeavors due to caffeine, there are other great reasons to keep up the coffee! The healthy 
polyphenolic compounds found in coffee, such as chlorogenic acids, may benefit you whether or not you 
use coffee for sport4, 36. We know that coffee, as a complex beverage, can support a healthy lifestyle, 
including a suite of health benefits such as decreasing your risk of type 2 diabetes2, promoting liver 
health3, and longevity1. Use healthy, clean, purity coffee to your advantage in any way that feels right for 
you – whether it’s helping you get through a half-marathon, or simply contributing to your already healthy 
lifestyle. 
 
A call to action! 
 
Are you an athlete? Did this article pique your interest? Purity would like to recruit 50 
volunteers for an in-house “study” to gain feedback from athletes who drink both decaf and regular 
Purity coffee. If you are interested in volunteering for this project, please email X.  
 
 
References: 
 
1. 
Loftfield, E.; Freedman, N. D.; Graubard, B. I.; Guertin, K. A.; Black, A.; Wen-Yi, H.; Shebl, 
F. M.; Mayne, S. T.; Rashmi, S., Association of coffee consumption with overall and cause-
specific mortality in a large us prospective cohort study. American Journal of Epidemiology 
2015, 182, 1010-1022. 
2. 
Carlström, M.; Larsson, S. C., Coffee consumption and reduced risk of developing type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Nutrition Reviews 2018, 76, 395-417. 
3. 
Molloy, J. W.; Calcagno, C. J.; Williams, C. D.; Jones, F. J.; Torres, D. M.; Harrison, S. A., 
Association of coffee and caffeine consumption with fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis, and degree of hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology 2011, 55, 429-436. 

4. 
Tajik, N.; Tajik, M.; Mack, I.; Enck, P., The potential effects of chlorogenic acid, the main 
phenolic components in coffee, on health: a comprehensive review of the literature. 2017, 
2215. 
5. 
Liu, J.; Sui, X.; Lavie, C. J.; Hebert, J. R.; Earnest, C. P.; Zhang, J.; Blair, S. N., Association of 
Coffee Consumption With All-Cause and Cardiovascular Disease Mortality. Mayo Clinic 
Proceedings 2013, 88, 1066-1074. 
6. 
Rivers, W. H. R.; Webber, H. N., The action of caffeine on the capacity for muscular 
work. The Journal of Physiology 1907, 36, 33-47. 
7. 
Costill, D. L.; Dalsky, G. P.; Fink, W. J., Effects of caffeine ingestion on metabolism and 
exercise performance. Medicine and science in sports 1978, 10, 155-8. 
8. 
Grgic, J.; Grgic, I.; Pickering, C.; Schoenfeld, B. J.; Bishop, D. J.; Pedisic, Z., Wake up and 
smell the coffee: caffeine supplementation and exercise performance—an umbrella review of 
21 published meta-analyses. British Journal of Sports Medicine 2019, bjsports-2018-100278. 
9. 
Doherty, M.; Smith, P. M., Effects of Caffeine Ingestion on Exercise Testing: A Meta-
Analysis. International Journal of Sport Nutrition & Exercise Metabolism 2004, 14, 626-646. 
10. 
Salinero, J. J.; Lara, B.; Del Coso, J., Effects of acute ingestion of caffeine on team sports 
performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Research in Sports Medicine 2019, 27, 
238-256. 
11. 
Ellis, M.; Noon, M.; Myers, T.; Clarke, N., Low Doses of Caffeine: Enhancement of 
Physical Performance in Elite Adolescent Male Soccer Players. International Journal of Sports 
Physiology & Performance 2019, 14, 569-575. 
12. 
Clarke, N. D.; Richardson, D. L.; Thie, J.; Taylor, R., Coffee Ingestion Enhances 1-Mile 
Running Race Performance. International Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance 2018, 13, 
789. 
13. 
Grgic, J.; Trexler, E. T.; Lazinica, B.; Pedisic, Z., Effects of caffeine intake on muscle 
strength and power: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the International Society 
of Sports Nutrition 2018, 1. 
14. 
Burke, L. M., Caffeine and sports performance. Applied Physiology, Nutrition and 
Metabolism 2008, 33, 1319-1324. 
15. 
Jung, S.; Kim, M. H.; Park, J. H.; Jeong, Y.; Ko, K. S., Cellular Antioxidant and Anti-
Inflammatory Effects of Coffee Extracts with Different Roasting Levels. Journal of Medicinal 
Food 2017, 20, 626-635. 
16. 
Liang, N.; Xue, W.; Kennepohl, P.; Kitts, D. D., Interactions between major chlorogenic 
acid isomers and chemical changes in coffee brew that affect antioxidant activities. Food 
Chemistry 2016. 
17. 
Quiñones, M.; Miguel, M.; Aleixandre, A., Beneficial effects of polyphenols on 
cardiovascular disease. Pharmacological Research 2013, 68, 125-131. 
18. 
Palaska, I.; Papathanasiou, E.; Theoharides, T. C., Use of polyphenols in periodontal 
inflammation. European Journal of Pharmacology 2013, 720, 77-83. 
19. 
Laurence, G.; Wallman, K.; Guelfi, K., Effects of caffeine on time trial performance in 
sedentary men. Journal of Sports Sciences 2012, 30, 1235-1240. 
20. 
Spriet, L. L., Exercise and Sport Performance with Low Doses of Caffeine. Sports 
Medicine 2014, 44, 175-184. 

21. 
Wiles, J. D.; Bird, S. R.; Hopkins, J.; Riley, M., Effect of caffeinated coffee on running 
speed, respiratory factors, blood lactate and perceived exertion during 1500-m treadmill 
running. British Journal Of Sports Medicine 1992, 26, 116-120. 
22. 
Hodgson, A. B.; Randell, R. K.; Jeukendrup, A. E., The metabolic and performance effects 
of caffeine compared to coffee during endurance exercise. Plos One 2013, 8, e59561-e59561. 
23. 
Higgins, S.; Straight, C. R.; Lewis, R. D., The Effects of Preexercise Caffeinated Coffee 
Ingestion on Endurance Performance: An Evidence-Based Review. International Journal of Sport 
Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 2016, 26, 221-239. 
24. 
Davis, J. M.; Zhao, Z.; Stock, H. S.; Mehl, K. A.; Buggy, J.; Hand, G. A., Central nervous 
system effects of caffeine and adenosine on fatigue. American Journal of Physiology-
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology 2003, 284, R399-R404. 
25. 
Astorino, T. A.; Terzi, M. N.; Roberson, D. W.; Burnett, T. R., Effect of Caffeine Intake on 
Pain Perception During High-Intensity Exercise. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and 
Exercise Metabolism 2011, 21, 27-32. 
26. 
Sawynok, J., Adenosine receptor activation and nociception. European Journal of 
Pharmacology 1998, 347, 1-11. 
27. 
Keisler, B. D.; Armsey, T. D., Caffeine As an Ergogenic Aid. 2006, p 215. 
28. 
Ganio, M. S.; Klau, J. F.; Casa, D. J.; Armstrong, L. E.; Maresh, C. M., Effect of Caffeine on 
Sport-Specific Endurance Performance: A Systematic Review. The Journal of Strength & 
Conditioning Research 2009, 23. 
29. 
EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, N.; Allergies, Scientific Opinion on the substantiation of 
health claims related to caffeine and increase in physical performance during short-term high-
intensity exercise (ID 737, 1486, 1489), increase in endurance performance (ID 737, 1486), 
increase in endurance capacity (ID 1488) and reduction in the rated perceived exertion/effort 
during exercise (ID 1488, 1490) pursuant to Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. EFSA 
Journal 2011, 9, 2053. 
30. 
Astorino, T. A.; Terzi, M. N.; Roberson, D. W.; Burnett, T. R., Effect of Two Doses of 
Caffeine on Muscular Function during Isokinetic Exercise. In 2010; Vol. 42, pp 2205-2210. 
31. 
Astorino, T. A.; Roberson, D. W., Efficacy of acute caffeine ingestion for short-term high-
intensity exercise performance: a systematic review. Journal of Strength and Conditioning 
Research 2010, 24, 257-65. 
32. 
Glaister, M.; Gissane, C., Caffeine and Physiological Responses to Submaximal Exercise: 
A Meta-Analysis. International Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance 2018, 13, 402-411. 
33. 
Del Coso, J.; Muñoz, G.; Muñoz-Guerra, J., Prevalence of caffeine use in elite athletes 
following its removal from the World Anti-Doping Agency list of banned substances. Applied 
Physiology, Nutrition & Metabolism 2011, 36, 555-561. 
34. 
Pickering, C.; Kiely, J., Are the Current Guidelines on Caffeine Use in Sport Optimal for 
Everyone? Inter-individual Variation in Caffeine Ergogenicity, and a Move Towards Personalised 
Sports Nutrition. Sports Medicine 2018, 48, 7-16. 
35. 
Guest, N.; Corey, P.; Vescovi, J.; El-Sohemy, A., Caffeine, CYP1A2 Genotype, and 
Endurance Performance in Athletes. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 2018, 50, 1570-
1578. 

36. 
Buscemi, S.; Marventano, S.; Antoci, M.; Cagnetti, A.; Castorina, G.; Galvano, F.; 
Marranzano, M.; Mistretta, A., Coffee and metabolic impairment: an updated review of 
epidemiological studies. NFS Journal 2016, 3, 1-7. 
37. 
Farah, A. Chapter 2.1 Coffee Constituents, in Coffee: Emerging health effects and disease 
prevention, First Edition. Edited by Yi-Fang Chu. 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
38.  
Liang, N. and Kitts, D.  Role of Chlorogenic Acids in Controlling Oxidative and Inflammatory 
Stress Conditions.  Nutrients. 8, 16; doi:10.3390/nu8010016. 2015. 
 
 
 
 
