HOW USAID WORKS TO MAKE THE 
COFFEE SUPPLY CHAIN SUSTAINABLE
USAID and the Coffee Sector
The U.S. coffee industry is responsible for nearly 1.7 million American jobs and $225 billion of national GDP, but is almost 
entirely dependent on overseas coffee production from predominantly low and lower middle income countries. Through Feed 
the Future, the U.S. Government’s global hunger and food security initiative, USAID works with U.S. and international coffee 
companies and non-profit organizations to assist the world’s many at-risk coffee producers. 
USAID’s work on coffee spans many countries on three continents and includes companies such as Keurig Dr Pepper, 
Starbucks, Neumann Kaffee Gruppe, Sucafina Specialty, Olam and Nespresso. Other partners include institutions like Root 
Capital, TechnoServe, Tetra Tech, and World Coffee Research. 
Together, we are combating threats posed by the climate crisis that endanger global coffee crops. We are also working to 
mitigate some of the root causes driving migration, which among other factors has been clearly linked to shocks to the coffee 
industry in Central America. We’re working with groups like the Specialty Coffee Association to develop solutions to 
historically low producer prices that threaten farmer livelihoods. And we’re connecting coffee farmers to regional and 
international buyers, so they can reliably access global markets and supply chains. But access is not enough to ensure a stable 
supply chain, which is why we also help small-scale farmers boost productivity, improve quality control, and meet international 
standards to compete in global markets.
This is a win-win: Coffee is not only a popular beverage consumed by over three-quarters of U.S. consumers, it is also a critical 
source of income for some 12.5 million farmers in developing countries. By investing in efforts that help smallholder coffee 
producers in Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean, and Asia boost their productivity and incomes, we are transforming lives 
while supporting U.S. jobs and helping ensure a steady supply of quality coffee to the United States.
PHOTO: USAID / Kate McDonald Polakiewicz
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021
PHOTO: John Healey, Fintrac Inc. 

PHOTO: Fintrac Inc.
Global Programs
Feed the Future Partnership for Sustainable Supply Chains. The Feed the Future Partnership for Sustainable Supply 
Chains (PSSC) was launched in December 2020 with Root Capital, Keurig Dr Pepper and Ezrah Charitable Trust to help small 
agricultural businesses stay afloat during the COVID-19 pandemic, and rebuild in its wake. The U.S. International Development 
Finance Corporation complements the partnership with a $35 million loan guarantee. PSSC focuses on coffee and other 
crops.
PSSC helps small agribusinesses in twelve countries in Latin America, Africa and Asia, particularly those owned or led by 
women, navigate operational uncertainties and limited connectivity to markets through business advice and advisory services, 
debt relief and a resilience grant fund. With this financial support, businesses can continue to serve, and buy from, vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in their communities.
PSSC builds on a long-standing partnership between USAID, Root Capital and Keurig Dr Pepper that started in 2013 to 
support smallholder farmers amid the crisis caused by coffee leaf rust in Central America.
Coffee Smallholder Livelihoods Facility. In October 2019, the world’s largest green coffee service group—Neumann 
Kaffee Gruppe—introduced NKG BLOOM, a long-term sustainable-sourcing initiative designed to address poverty in coffee 
communities, financially empower coffee farmers and ensure a healthy future for coffee. To form the core of NKG BLOOM, 
NKG led the creation of a Coffee Smallholder Livelihoods Facility—an innovative $25 million revolving facility involving leading 
European investment banks ABN AMRO, Rabobank and BNP Paribas. And for the first time, the partner banks will share the 
direct risks on farmer defaults. The facility is further backed by two complementary default guarantees by USAID and IDH, the 
Sustainable Trade Initiative.
Like any enterprise, smallholder coffee farmers require inputs, finance and access to markets to stay in business. Private 
companies in the coffee sector see opportunities to help—in part to protect their supply of sustainable, quality coffee—but 
are deterred by the high risks of lending in the sector. This guarantee with NKG, which comes at no financial cost to USAID, 
provides a powerful combination of first-loss capital and a credit guarantee to "buy down" those risks. NKG is able to use 
funding from the investment banks to fully support smallholder coffee farmers. This activity supports up to $100 million of 
in-kind and cash lending to farmers in eleven countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The goal is to reach at least 
100,000 smallholder farming families over the 15-year period of the guarantee.
Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation, Price Risk Management. Feed the Future Partnering for Innovation is 
supporting two pilots to equip smallholders to mitigate the impacts of ongoing coffee market volatility, thereby increasing 
resilience and access to financing.
Under the pilot with Farm Africa, a regional capacity building organization, 90 representatives of 30 smallholder-based coffee 
producer organizations from Uganda, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are receiving training in 
price risk management strategies. Root Capital, an agribusiness lender focused on smallholder supply chains, is partnering to 
link increased access to finance with improved risk management. Participating producer organizations are current Root 
Capital clients. Those that successfully complete the training and demonstrate improved capacity in price risk management will 
be eligible to request additional loans from Root Capital. The activity also is building Root Capital's ability to integrate price 
risk management into its business model and coffee lending portfolio.
Under the pilot with Oikocredit, an agricultural lender working in smallholder supply chains, representatives of ten 
smallholder coffee producer organizations (SPOs) in Peru are getting training in price risk management strategies with a 
focus on trading coffee market options. It also developed an "Open Position Dashboard" to help SPOs determine price risk 
exposure and evaluate options purchasing and provides SPOs with training and technical assistance to use it. SPOs that 
complete the program and demonstrate improved price risk management capacity may apply for loans from Oikocredit to 
purchase options. As of March 2021, four cooperatives obtained loans of $25,000 each. Oikocredit is working to expand its 
price risk management program across origins in Central America and Africa.
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021

Farmer-to-Farmer. USAID's Farmer-to-Farmer (F2F) program provides technical assistance from U.S. volunteers to 
farmers, farm groups, agribusinesses and other agriculture sector institutions in developing and transitional countries. Partners 
of the Americas, an implementing partner of F2F, works on coffee activities in Guatemala and Myanmar. In Guatemala, 
Partners of the Americas places volunteers to assist farmer groups in the Western and Central Highlands. The activity works 
on coffee processing and marketing, with clients ranging from large cooperatives exporting globally to small groups producing 
niche coffees. In Myanmar, Partners of the Americas supports coffee propagation, harvesting, disease management and 
value-added processing, as well as marketing and export assistance. Recent F2F volunteer assignments have focused on 
assisting with strategic planning and organizational development, Good Manufacturing Practices certification in coffee, 
marketing, grant proposal development and food safety compliance.
Another F2F implementing partner, NCBA CLUSA, is working on coffee systems in Peru, Ecuador and Honduras. They 
build the capacity of producers, associations, cooperatives and small enterprises to improve sustainable coffee systems 
through better production and postharvest handling practices, as well as organizational strengthening. In Ecuador, the project 
focuses primarily on the coastal and Amazonian regions and is working with around 10 coffee organizations, including growers, 
associations, input suppliers and other businesses. Peru activities focus on cooperatives in Huánuco and San Martin, providing 
volunteer expertise in topics such as production and processing, business strategy, and organizational development. Activities 
in Honduras have recently started up with planning for future activities underway.
Farmfit. IDH, The Sustainable Trade Initiative, manages the Farmfit Fund which offers affordable financial resources to start, 
sustain and grow businesses that sustainably engage with smallholders in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The project is 
structured as a blended finance fund with $90 million of the funding as first loss capital for up to 20% of any transaction. The 
Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mondelez, Jacobs Douwe Egberts and Unilever will provide first loss funding with a 50% 
USAID/DFC credit guarantee on up to $250 million. Coffee is an important commodity for the Fund.
Cooperative Development Project. Equal Exchange's Cooperative Development Project, funded by USAID, is working 
with a coffee association in Mexico, Finca Triunfo Verde, to improve the quality and productivity of their coffee. Equal 
Exchange is supporting the association in facilitating exchanges between producers to model best practices in shade 
diversification, soil conservation, and pest and disease control. The activity is also working to foster young people's interest in 
coffee production by  training youth and helping them set up their own model farms.
PHOTO: Root Capital
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021

PHOTO: Fintrac Inc.
Sustainable Coffee Challenge. USAID continues to serve on the Advisory Board of the Sustainable Coffee Challenge 
(SCC), which is working to make coffee the first 100 percent sustainable commodity in the world. The Board also includes 
private companies such as Starbucks, Keurig, Olam, Neumann and McDonalds, as well as several non-profits. In 2017, USAID 
worked with SCC's Renovation & Rehabilitation Collective Action Network to fund the development of an in-depth 
guidebook for supply chain actors, donors and NGOs interested in helping farmers renovate their aging and diseased coffee 
trees. The Guidebook for Roasters, Traders and Supply Chain Partners notes that research and rehabilitation best practices 
could benefit more than half of the 7 million hectares of smallholder coffee lands, increasing global production anywhere from 
5-20 percent and generating $1-3 billion for farmers from additional coffee sales. The R&R Network has set an ambitious goal 
to encourage the renovation of 1 billion trees, and is bringing together actors from across the coffee sector to increase 
investment to meet this goal.
Other finance-related activities. The following three activities include the coffee sector in their list of commodities.
Aceli Africa is a “market incentive facility” that is mobilizing private capital in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda by 
providing credit enhancements and incentives for lenders to increase disbursements to agricultural small and medium 
enterprises with specific impact priorities including strengthening food security and creating opportunities for women.
Clarmondial manages a Food Securities Fund, a credit channel between qualified investors and emerging market agricultural 
companies that uses a blended finance product to make loans available to companies committed to sustainable practices.
Barak manages the Lending for African Farming Company, which provides agricultural short-term working capital loans.
Country Programs
Burundi. Coffee is enormously important in Burundi, providing income for an estimated 800,000 rural families dependent 
directly on coffee farming for their main source of cash income. Since 2016, the Burundi Coffee Alliance Project has 
supported farmers' cooperatives, in partnership with the Swiss-based coffee trading company, Sucafina Specialty and 
Burundi-based producer and exporter, Greenco. The activity has invested in a range of training opportunities—from Good 
Agricultural Practices and Sustainable Agricultural Land Management, to organizational management and gender trainings 
focused at the household level. Trainings take place in farmer hubs constructed by the project, as well as through Farmer Field 
Schools and at demonstration plots. The activity advances the interests of coffee farmers by providing tools to diversify coffee 
cropping systems through the introduction of other production options like beekeeping; establishing nurseries for quality 
seedlings; creating growers' associations for women and youth; providing health services; and enabling market access.
Colombia. As a part of a broader strategy to reduce conflict and promote peace in Colombia, the USAID-funded 
Producers to Markets Alliance (PMA) increases the competitiveness of smallholder farmers within marginalized rural 
communities in five value chains, including coffee. In specialty coffee, USAID supports increased on-farm productivity and 
improved coffee quality through the implementation of good postharvest practices, and helps connect producer organizations 
to external buyers in cooperation with Boot Coffee consultants to reach sector businesses. These firms include Starbucks, 
Olam, Nespresso, Farmer Brothers, Kafkao Republik and Racafé, among others. This year, due to COVID-19, PMA launched 
"Virtual Buyers Caravans” which allow farmers to reach a wider audience of potential buyers. This appears to be a best 
practice that will continue after COVID-19 travel restrictions. 
PMA works in an integrated approach with two other major USAID/Colombia activities. Land for Prosperity improves rural 
land tenure which allows farmers to invest in long term crops such as coffee and Community Development for Licit 
Opportunities which works with community development and rural infrastructure to facilitate farm to market transportation. 
PMA is also actively supporting the National Federation of Coffee Growers through regional coffee competitions and the 
“Coffee for Peace in Colombia” initiative to promote traceable sales of specialty coffee to international buyers at price 
premiums. PMA is targeting nearly 18,000 coffee producers through 47 commercial alliances over the life of the program.
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021

PHOTO: Fintrac Inc.
Democratic Republic of Congo. USAID is helping the DRC modernize its coffee industry by strengthening coffee 
cooperatives in South Kivu, enhancing the quantity and quality of specialty coffee production, and building direct market 
connections with international coffee traders. The Feed the Future DRC Value Chains Activity targets 15,000 coffee 
farmers to increase production and better market specialty coffee. The consortium is led by Tetra Tech and includes 
TechnoServe, World Coffee Research, Search for Common Ground, J.E. Austin and Associates, and Banyan Global. The activity 
supports gender equity, women’s empowerment, improved access to finance, conflict sensitivity and behavior change 
communications.
Ethiopia. Ethiopia is not only the birthplace of Arabica coffee, and an important coffee producer and exporter, but is also a 
heavy coffee consumer. Coffee is strongly rooted in Ethiopian socio-cultural traditions, and is an experience shared with family 
and friends with colorful daily ceremonies. Ethiopia has the world’s most distinct single origin coffee flavors. Coffee is 
Ethiopia’s most important and valuable export commodity and the promotion of specialty coffee is a key objective of the 
Feed the Future Ethiopia Value Chain Activity (FtFEVCA). FtFEVCA works with several cooperatives and commercial 
farms in parts of the Oromia and Southern regions through various processes supporting washed and natural coffees. The 
package of agronomic training and improvements promoted under the project for harvesting and processing coffees is 
achieving noteworthy increases in both coffee value and farm profitability. FtFEVCA is investing in supporting coffee nurseries 
to address the challenge of replacing old coffee trees that show high levels of disease and low productivity. The activity also 
supports outgrower schemes that produce and sell coffee to neighboring coffee plantations via a contractual relationship that 
benefits all parties involved. In addition, FtFEVCA has pooled local and international experts and resources to identify and 
evaluate the untapped potential of coffee varietals.
Guatemala. The Guatemala Coffee Value Chains Project is supported by USAID as part of Feed the Future and is 
implemented by the Federation of Agricultural Cooperatives of Guatemala's Coffee Producers (FEDECOCAGUA). The 
objective of the project is to increase income and improve the resilience and nutrition of small coffee producers and their 
families in three clusters in the departments of Huehuetenango, Quiché and San Marcos. This project will benefit 15,000 small 
coffee producers through improving agricultural productivity and promoting diversification alternatives for income generation, 
expanding market access, and improving the resilience of small coffee producers through environmentally-friendly agricultural 
practices and the management of watersheds for efficient use of water for agriculture. These actions will be complemented by 
activities to improve household nutrition, mainly by increasing the availability of animal protein and nutrient-dense crops, 
focusing on nutrition-sensitive agriculture (home gardens and poultry units) and social behavior change.
Honduras. Honduras is the fourth largest exporter of coffee to the US and employs up to one million people in the coffee 
industry each year. Coffee is one of the two priority value chains for USAID/Honduras to increase household incomes and 
improve nutrition. Coffee contributes 30 percent of the agricultural GDP and 5 percent of the national GDP. In June 2018, 
USAID signed a Global Development Alliance to establish the Coffee Alliance activity with COHONDUCAFE Foundation, 
Compañia Hondureña del Cafe (COHONDUCAFE), and Jacobs Douwe Egberts. These private sector partners have a direct 
interest in increasing productivity and creating market linkages that align with their core business model. The high-level goal of 
this Alliance is to increase household income by 25 percent for 4,800 coffee grower households through increased 
productivity and access to markets and credit.
Mexico. The Alliance for Sustainable Landscapes and Markets Activity led by The Rainforest Alliance will maximize 
the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the coffee landscape at a meaningful scale, in alignment with national greenhouse 
gas reduction priorities, by reducing deforestation pressures and expand forest conservation and restoration in at-risk coffee 
production landscapes in Chiapas and Oaxaca. The activity will improve the economic viability of sustainable coffee farming 
and agroforestry management through capacity building of local producer associations, cooperatives, ejidos—areas of 
communal land used for agriculture—and community businesses to manage their agroforestry and forestlands more 
sustainably and productively; manage their businesses more profitability and competitively; and deepen their access to 
investment and incentives through expanding partnerships with the public and private sectors for sustainable supply chains.
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021

Peru. Being the second-largest cocaine-producing country in the world, the Government of Peru has successfully adopted a 
counter-narcotics strategy focused on eradication, interdiction and alternative development with the U.S. Government’s 
support. Coffee is the second most widely used crop substitute for coca. Under the USAID/TechnoServe Global 
Development Alliance Coffee Alliance for Excellence (CAFE), the implementer is working to increase productivity, quality, 
and resulting incomes of 10,000 coffee farming households located throughout selected areas of San Martin, Huanuco and 
Ucayali. Under CAFE, USAID and a number of private companies—including Althelia Ecosphere and coffee buyer Jacobs 
Douwe Egberts—are helping lift thousands of rural families out of poverty and integrate them into the licit economy. By the 
end of this five-year public-private partnership, CAFE will have leveraged $11.3 million.
Uganda. Under its Feed the Future program, the Uganda Mission is continuing to support both the national authorities, 
through the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, and private sector players in expanding the production and quality of 
Uganda's coffee harvests. For example, USAID is providing funds to the aBi Development, a multi-donor entity, which 
facilitates smallholder farmers and entrepreneurs to improve the efficiency of their operations along the coffee production, 
harvesting and processing value-chain by means of matching-grants and the provision of business development services. As an 
active member of Uganda’s Coffee Platform's National Steering Committee, USAID has been supporting the implementation 
of the Coffee Roadmap for the past three years. This plan details the principal interventions required for the development of 
coffee, which is the most important single source of foreign exchange earnings provided by the agricultural sector. Coffee 
contributes significantly to the livelihoods of smallholder farming households in Uganda, which represent some two-thirds of 
the country's population. 2020 saw the highest ever coffee volume exported from Uganda, while projections show continued 
expansion for the foreseeable future.
Regional Programs
Green Invest Asia. USAID's Green Invest Asia supports mid-growth agriculture and forestry companies with business 
strategies, environmental assessments and advice to improve their sustainable commodity production and business practices. 
Initial focus has been on rice, rubber, timber, coffee, coconut and cacao with a focus on coffee in Indonesia and Vietnam. 
To improve sustainable coffee production in Southeast Asia, the project has partnered with global coffee trader Jacobs Douwe 
Egberts to improve the sustainability of Vietnam’s coffee sector. Analysis of production data from 15,000 farmers is informing 
strategies for improving fertilizer utilization, reducing greenhouse gas emissions while improving farm profitability, and 
enhancing resilience and carbon sequestration through intercropping within their supply chain. Efforts are underway to launch 
a similar partnership with international conglomerate Nestlé in Vietnam and Indonesia to help inform its investments into 
low-carbon land use practices among farmers, including intercropping and insetting. The project has also researched the role 
of women in the coffee value chain, part of a regional analysis on how women are driving coffee sustainability in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Philippine and Vietnam. In Vietnam, women lead at least half of all domestic trading companies; if women’s labor is 
recognized, valued and invested in adequately, the report outlined ways the sector can improve.
Produced by United States Agency for International Development
July 2021
PHOTO: TechnoServe
