Coffee against Alzheimer's?
Scientists show strong effects
Start training
For Brain Awareness Week 2018:
Interview with Dr. Amit Lampit
Bulletproof Brain Training: Study proves
effectiveness of NeuroNation Premium
Why Should You Do Cognitive Training:
An Interview with Professor
Falkenstein
Brain Training Against Depression
What is brain training good for?
Study reveals: Brain training improves
cognitive functions
ScientiNcally proven: Numerous studies
support brain training
Study: NeuroNation improves memory
Physical exercise boost brain training
effects
For Brain Awareness Week 2018:
Interview with Dr. Amit Lampit
Bulletproof Brain Training: Study proves
effectiveness of NeuroNation Premium
Talking to yourself in third person can
ease up your emotional tension
This is how stress weakens our ability
Pardon? Yes, you read correctly. A new study by Indiana
University proved: caffeine can reduce the risk of
dementia.
In their Nrst breakthrough in 2016, the same researchers have been
able to prove, that an enzyme called NMNAT2 has a protective effect
on our brain and can even guard it against dementia. The enzyme re-
duces one of the main reasons for dementia, misfolded tau proteins
that accumulate with age as plaques in our brain. Neurodegenerative
diseases with deposits of tau protein are called tauopathies; the most
famous tauopathy is Alzheimer's disease.
Caffeine and its super powers
The discovery of NMNAT2 led to a Nerce research of substances, that
can increase its production in the brain. 1,280 different products were
analyzed and 24 of these have proved to be NMNAT2-increasing. One
of these substances – also the most effective – is caffeine.
Important articles
Recent articles
Login
Science
Training

Tweet
Share
Start training
Sources:
to control our emotions
Executive Functions: Key to regain
control of your life?
Healthy and Happy: How a Nt Brain
keeps your mood up
Does slow and steady really win the
race? Stanford study reveals new
Nndings
How to build up a Brain savings
account?
Neuroscience: How to beat depression
with brain training
Stop snack attacks: Scientists reveal
best techniques against cravings
Harvard study reveals: Here is how you
can stop Burnout
That’s how healthy eating impacts your
brain
How cognitive training helps
throughout the lifespan
Harvard study reveals: Here is how you
can stop Burnout
Exclusive Insights into the World of
Science: Interview with Dr. Susanne
Jaeggi
An Easter Egg for your Brain
Coffee against Alzheimer's? Scientists
show strong effects
A strong working memory may
increase well-being
Warm-up for your Brain: Best trick to
"This work could help advance efforts to develop drugs that increase
levels of this NMNAT2 in the brain, creating a chemical 'blockade'
against the debilitating effects of neurodegenerative disorders," said
Professor Hui-Chen Lu, who led the study.
Be sharp and Ct - a holistic approach to brain Ctness
Drinking coffee might trigger a celebration for Starbucks addicts, but,
unfortunately, it is not enough. A healthy diet, relaxation, and the right
activity are the building blocks for your mental Ntness. A study by
Prof. Michael Valenzuela could prove, that cognitive active people
have a 46% lower risk of developing dementia. Cognitive activity could
be achieved in different ways: playing an instrument, learning a for-
eign language – or scientiNc brain training.
The activating NeuroNation brain training was developed together
with renowned neuroscientists and awarded for its effectiveness by
the Federal Ministry of Health. Take care of your most important or-
gan – you are the only one, who can do it!
[1] “Screening with an NMNAT2-MSD platform identiNes small molecules that modulate NM-
NAT2 levels in cortical neurons” by Yousuf O. Ali, Gillian Bradley & Hui-Chen Lu in ScientiNc Re-
ports. Published online March 7 2017.
[2] Indiana University “Caffeine Boost Enzyme That Could Protect Against Dementia.” Neuro-
scienceNews. NeuroscienceNews, 4 March 2017.

learn anything better
More articles
Deutsch English
Effectiveness
Science
Group packages
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Legal Disclosure
Help
Contact
Career
