Coee composition &
nutritional
information
print this page
search…
Subscribe for updates
about us
all about coee
browse by topic 
learn more
media room
Nutrition Information
https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/topic-info/coffee-composition-nutrition-...
1 of 5
4/28/2022, 6:45 PM

Nutrition Information
The nutritional prole of coee
This section provides information on the nutritional prole
of a cup of black coee. Throughout this topic, the
nutritional prole of 100ml of medium strength, black,
caeinated coee is discussed. However, the addition of
milk, cream, sugar or other sweeteners to taste will aect
the nal nutritional prole of a cup of coee.
Nutrition information
Black coee contains no signicant amounts of the
macronutrients, fat, carbohydrate and protein and
therefore contains only 1-2 kcal per 100ml .
However, the nal nutritional prole of a cup of coee will
be aected by several factors:
• The addition of milk, cream, sugar or other
sweeteners to taste will aect the nal nutritional
value and may increase the calorie content.
• The variation in cup sizes used across Europe may
alter the nutritional value.
Black coee contains a number of micronutrients, notably
potassium, magnesium and niacin. The sodium level is
very low. The data below provides the micronutrient
nutritional prole of 100ml of medium strength black
coee .
Introduction
Compounds in coee
Other compounds in
coee
Nutrition Information
References
Topic
overview
Latest
research
34
34
Nutrition Information
https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/topic-info/coffee-composition-nutrition-...
2 of 5
4/28/2022, 6:45 PM

The type of water used in preparation (i.e. hard or soft
water) may inuence the micronutrient content of a cup of
black coee, particularly in relation to calcium and
magnesium levels. Slight variations in composition may
occur due to origin, growing conditions, blend
composition and processing of the coee.
Coee and hydration
Black coee contains in excess of 95% water and,
according to research, when consumed in moderation,
does not lead to dehydration. Therefore, a cup of coee
can help contribute to the daily uid balance
.
35-37
Nutrition Information
https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/topic-info/coffee-composition-nutrition-...
3 of 5
4/28/2022, 6:45 PM

• Studies have shown that caeine consumption, up to
the equivalent amount found in 5 cups of caeinated
coee, does not cause dehydration .
• There may be a mild short-term diuretic eect from
caeine but this is not strong enough to outweigh
the benets of uid intake from coee
consumption .
• Research suggests that moderate caeine
consumption does not alter total body water and
uid distribution  and drinking a variety of
caeinated beverages, such as coee, can contribute
to meeting the body’s requirement for uids .
• The body of evidence available suggests that advice
to abstain from coee drinking to maintain uid
balance is unfounded.
35
35
36
37
Nutrition Information
https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/topic-info/coffee-composition-nutrition-...
4 of 5
4/28/2022, 6:45 PM

This information is intended for Healthcare professional audiences.
Please consider the environment before printing.
© 2022 ISIC the institute for scientic information on coee
Website by Cotswold Web.
Follow @coffeeandhealth
Nutrition Information
https://www.coffeeandhealth.org/topic-info/coffee-composition-nutrition-...
5 of 5
4/28/2022, 6:45 PM
