Your source for the latest research news
Date:
Source:
Summary:
Share:
Science News
from research organizations
Coffee helps teams work together
Caffeine makes people more positive by making them more alert
June 5, 2018
Ohio State University
Good teamwork begins with a cup of coﬀee for everyone, a new study suggests. Researchers
found that people gave more positive reviews for their group's performance on a task -- and
their own contribution -- if they drank caﬀeinated coﬀee beforehand. A second study showed
that people talked more in a group setting under the inﬂuence of caﬀeinated coﬀee -- but they
also were more on-topic than those who drank decaf.
a b v e g d
FULL STORY
Good teamwork begins with a cup of coffee for everyone, a new study suggests.
Researchers found that people gave more positive reviews for their group's performance on a task -- and their
own contribution -- if they drank caﬀeinated coﬀee beforehand.
A second study showed that people talked more in a group setting under the inﬂuence of caﬀeinated coﬀee --
but they also were more on-topic than those who drank decaf.
Coﬀee seems to work its magic in teams by making people more alert, said Amit Singh, co-author of the study
and a doctoral student in marketing at The Ohio State University's Fisher College of Business.
"We found that increased alertness was what led to the positive results for team performance," Singh said.
"Not surprisingly, people who drank caﬀeinated coﬀee tended to be more alert."
Singh conducted the study with Vasu Unnava and H. Rao Unnava, both formerly at Ohio State and now with
the Graduate School of Management at the University of California, Davis. The study appears online in the
Journal of Psychopharmacology.

While many studies have looked at how caﬀeine aﬀects individual performance, this is the ﬁrst to examine the
impact it has on teams, Singh said.
The ﬁrst study involved 72 undergraduate students who said they were coﬀee drinkers. They were instructed
not to drink coﬀee before the experiment.
Half of them ﬁrst participated in what they were told was a coﬀee-tasting task. They were split into groups of
ﬁve. After drinking a cup of coﬀee and rating its ﬂavor, they were given 30 minutes of ﬁller tasks to give the
caﬀeine a chance to kick in. The other half of the participants did the coﬀee tasting at the end of the
experiment.
Each group then read about and were asked to discuss a controversial topic -- the Occupy movement, a liber‐
al movement that highlighted social and economic inequality. After a 15-minute discussion, group members
evaluated themselves and the other group members.
Results showed that those who drank the coﬀee before the discussion rated themselves and their fellow team
members more positively than did those who drank coﬀee after the discussion, Singh said.
The second study was similar, except that 61 students all drank coﬀee at the beginning of the study. However,
half drank decaf and the others drank caﬀeinated brew.
Those who drank caﬀeinated coﬀee rated themselves and their fellow group members more positively than
those who drank decaf.
It had to do with alertness.
All participants rated how alert they felt at the end of the study, and those who drank the caﬀeinated coﬀee
rated themselves as more alert than the others.
A key ﬁnding was that people who rated themselves as more alert -- whether they drank caﬀeinated coﬀee or
not -- also tended to give higher marks to themselves and their fellow group members.
This suggests that any intervention that increases alertness (such as exercise) may also produce similar re‐
sults, which the authors propose in the paper as a future research topic.
"We suspect that when people are more alert they see themselves and the other group members contributing
more, and that gives them a more positive attitude," Singh said.
But the caﬀeine does more than just increase good feelings. The researchers did an analysis of the group dis‐
cussion in the second study, rating how much each group member talked and stayed on topic.
Results showed that people tended to talk more after drinking caﬀeine, but they also tended to stay more on
topic.
"They're talking about more relevant things after drinking caﬀeinated coﬀee," he said.
One might think that if people are talking more about a controversial topic like the Occupy movement, that
may cause friction in the group. But that's not what the study suggests.
People who drank caﬀeinated coﬀee were more likely than those who drank decaf to say they would be willing
to work with their group again.
"Even though they are talking more, agreeing and disagreeing, they still want to work with them again," Singh
said.

Cite This Page:
Ohio State University. "Coﬀee helps teams work together: Caﬀeine makes people more positive by making
them more alert." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 5 June 2018.
<www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/06/180605112118.htm>.
"Coﬀee didn't seem to make group discussions too uncomfortable and disagreeable."
Story Source:
Materials provided by Ohio State University. Original written by Jeﬀ Grabmeier. Note: Content may be edited
for style and length.
Journal Reference:
1. Vasu Unnava, Amit Surendra Singh, H. Rao Unnava. Coﬀee with co-workers: role of caﬀeine on evalu‐
ations of the self and others in group settings. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 2018;
026988111876066 DOI: 10.1177/0269881118760665
MLA
APA
Chicago
RELATED STORIES
Drinking Coffee Could Lead to a Longer Life, Scientist Says
July 10, 2017 — Scientists have found that people who drink coﬀee appear to live longer. Drinking coﬀee was
associated with lower risk of death due to heart disease, cancer, stroke, diabetes, and kidney disease. ...
read more ∠
Beneﬁts of Drinking Coffee Outweigh Risks, Review Suggests
June 27, 2016 — Coﬀee is enjoyed by millions of people every day and the 'coﬀee experience' has become a
staple of our modern life and culture. While the current body of research related to the eﬀects of coﬀee ...
read more ∠
Coffee Increases Prediabetes Risk in Susceptible Young Adults
Sep. 2, 2014 — Coﬀee increases the risk of prediabetes in young adults with hypertension who are slow caf‐
feine metabolisers, according to new results. People who drank more than three cups of coﬀee per day ...
read more ∠
Coffee Bean Roasting Acoustics

About This Site  |  Editorial Staﬀ  |  Awards & Reviews  |  Contribute  |  Advertise  |  Privacy Policy  |  Terms of Use
Copyright 2018 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners.
Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice.
Views expressed here do not necessarily reﬂect those of ScienceDaily, its staﬀ, its contributors, or its partners.
Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral programs, where indicated.
May 21, 2014 — People around the world are drawn to coﬀee's powerful allure -- for its beloved smell, and
taste, and for the caﬀeine boost it provides. As you enjoy your coﬀee beverage, however, odds are good ...
read more ∠
FROM AROUND THE WEB
Below are relevant articles that may interest you. ScienceDaily shares links and proceeds with scholarly publi‐
cations in the TrendMD network.
Free Subscriptions
Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters, updated daily and weekly. Or view
hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:
"  Email Newsletters
#  RSS Feeds
Follow Us
Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:
$  Facebook
%  Twitter
+  Google+
'  LinkedIn
Have Feedback?
Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and negative comments. Have any
problems using the site? Questions?
(  Leave Feedback
)  Contact Us
