 
 
1 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
OUR MISSION 
When we founded Purity Coffee in 2015,  we were committed to creating coffees with 
positive health outcomes as our key principle. We study  the health benefits of coffee and 
ways to achieve optimal levels of different compounds in the roasted coffee. From 
conscious sourcing of different cultivars, through roasting and packaging, we focus on 
health without compromise. This was (and is) our commitment to our customers.  
Ultimately, though, our customers brew the finished product for themselves, and it is with 
this in mind that we’ve delved into cold brew for this literature review. The science guided 
our decisions in creating our healthy, specially chosen and roasted cold brew as well. 
 
CONTENTS 
OUR MISSION ....................................................................................................................... 1 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 2 
BREWING REVIEW WITH GUIDELINES FOR COLD BREWING ...................................................... 2 
BASICS OF BREWING ........................................................................................................................ 2 
HEALTH POINTS OF COLD BREWED COFFEE .................................................................................... 3 
WHAT IS COLD BREW EXACTLY? ........................................................................................ 3 
KEEP PATHOGENS OUT, KEEP ANTI-MICROBIAL COMPOUNDS IN .................................... 4 
CHOOSE A ROAST LEVEL AND GRIND SIZE OPTIMUM FOR ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY ......... 5 
CHOOSE A GRIND SIZE AND ROAST LEVEL FOR GUT HEALTH ............................................ 6 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER .............................................................................................................. 8 
BASIC RECIPE FOR COLD BREW COFFEE ........................................................................................... 8 
CHART OF BREWING VARIABLES FOR COLD BREW COFFEE ........................................................... 10 
References……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..….11 
 
 
PURITY COFFEE  
Cold Brew:  
A Literature Review with Guidelines 
2020 

 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
PURITY COLD BREW:  
REVIEWING THE SCIENCE 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
Purity Coffee wants consumers to have more choice in coffee to meet their health goals.  
One of the main choices we make is how to brew our coffee.  There are a multitude of 
methods for making coffee, and each one influences which of the hundreds of compounds 
are extracted.  For the past few years cold brewing methods of preparation have become 
popular, adding to the crowded array of brewing methods. 
We often get questions about cold brew coffee, and we felt it was time for a survey of the 
literature from peer-reviewed research that has been published in scientific journals.  The 
internet is full of theories and practices, some are accurate, and others are conjecture.   
Our review has revealed that scientific research has barely begun on cold brew.  And, as 
always with published studies, we are rarely told what type of coffee was used, let alone 
what level of roasting was done.  Coffee quality varies widely, so we look for results that can 
be generalized or representative of an incredibly complex food product. We know that 
coffee is extremely complex, and many beneficial compounds can be created, destroyed or 
left untouched by different brewing methods at different temperatures.  Cold brew is no 
exception for this rule.   
BREWING REVIEW WITH GUIDELINES FOR COLD BREWING 
A quick review of basic principles of brewing will help frame the research on cold brewed 
coffee.  Brewing is a general term for preparing coffee. We use clean water to extract the 
soluble solids from coffee beans that have been ground to a range of particle sizes for a 
specific method of preparation.  In addition, the coffee and water is mixed or agitated during 
brewing, which impacts extraction.   
BASICS OF BREWING 
Choices in the variables of brew time, water temperature and pressure (used to pass the 
water through the grounds) also influence the resulting compounds and flavors. The usual 
goal of any brew method is to find the perfect combination of variables that yield the most 
pleasant flavors and avoid producing unpleasant flavors, creating a delicious beverage. Of 

 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
course, “pleasant” and “delicious” are subjective, and the fascination of coffee is that the 
same exact batch of roasted beans, brewed by different people using different methods 
could taste completely different, yet be pleasing to the preparer and displeasing to other 
people. 
Coffee gets most of its flavor from the chemical compounds that are released when they are 
dissolved in water.  In summary, making choices to yield a successful brew involves: 
 Quality of the water used (no chlorine, some mineral content, but not too much) 
 Type of brewing device (and filter method) 
 Ratio of coffee to water used 
 Appropriate grind size  
 Temperature of the water 
 Length of brew time 
 Intensity of mixing of the grounds in the water 
 Any pressure that may be involved (like espresso) 
The temperature of the water has one of the most significant impacts on the brew. The laws 
of thermodynamics apply here with the concept of energy (heat) used to break apart the 
chemical bonds within the coffee (Lee, 1992).  There are at least 1800 chemical constituents 
in coffee, many of which have different extraction rates and different flavors that they will 
contribute to the cup (Lee, and others, 1992). Some compounds may remain unaffected 
because there isn’t enough heat energy for reactions.  This, of course, is the biggest 
difference between hot and cold brewed coffees. 
HEALTH POINTS OF COLD BREWED COFFEE 
WHAT IS COLD BREW EXACTLY? 
The concept of cold brew is that ground coffee is extracted with water at room temperature 
(“ambient” = not chilled or heated) or cooler and steeped for an extended period of time to 
extract flavor compounds and soluble solids from the coffee.  The key point is that the water 
is not hot.  The brewing process swaps time for temperature – instead of brewing with near-
boiling water over a few minutes, cold brewing typically uses cool water and extended 
periods of time (12-24 hours) to extract an optimal amount of flavor compounds and solids 
from the ground beans. The variables above may all influence the final brew composition 
and may produce a unique sensory and quality profile in the finished beverage. Cold brew 
flavors vary widely from coffee brewed at higher temperatures.   

 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
HEALTHY COLD BREWING POINT 1:   
KEEP PATHOGENS OUT, KEEP ANTI-MICROBIAL COMPOUNDS IN 
Anyone doing cold brewing must consider food safety. Using water that is not near boiling 
increases the risk that any mold or pathogens, that may be on the coffee or the brewing 
device, will develop.  Cold brewing in a refrigerator is considered safer than ambient 
brewing, but still yeast, mold and bacteria can grow and survive at these temperatures. We 
have all experienced products in our fridges to which this has happened, and coffee is not 
immune. 
Yeast, bacteria, and mold can all survive at ambient temperatures (danger zone 40º to 
140ºF). Psychrophiles (i.e., Listeria monocytogenes) are a concern even under refrigeration. 
Sources of microbial contamination include water, containers, equipment, environment, 
personnel, and ingredients (Zuniga, 2016). Both Oregon State University and Cornell 
University conducted challenge studies by inoculating refrigerated temperature (4°C, 39.2°F) 
cold brew coffee from a commercial processor with Salmonella species, Listeria 
monocytogenes (L. mono), and Escherichia coli. Viable cells of all of these were found  
between 7 to 14 days after inoculation (Daeschel et al., 2017).  L. mono bacteria survived for 
up to three weeks after inoculation of refrigerated cold brew coffee. L. mono is the pathogen 
of greatest concern for cold brew coffee production and can be controlled with thorough 
cleaning of equipment and the environment (Lopez, 2020). 
A risky concept in the coffee industry is that coffee is its own antiseptic, which is partially 
true, where certain concentrations of caffeine and other compounds are inhibiting, not 
necessarily killing, some strains of bacteria.  However, leave a cup of coffee by your 
computer for a few days, or forget to empty your brew basket full of grounds before you go 
on vacation for two weeks, and you will clearly see that coffee does allow growth of 
organisms. 
That said, there are studies showing the anti-microbial compounds produced during roasting 
and the (potentially) low level of nutrients present to support microbial growth (Daglia et al, 
1994; Almeida et al, 2004). Caffeic acid and trigonelline showed similar inhibitory effect 
against the growth of microorganisms. The antimicrobial activity of caffeic acid had 
appreciable antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas, E. coli, S. aureus, and Bacillus cereus 
(Garrote, et al, 2004. Baranowski, et al, 1982). 
Caffeine, chlorogenic acid, and protocatechuic acid showed particularly strong effect against 
Serratia marcescens and Enterobacter cloacae. Trigonelline, caffeine, and protocatechuic 
acids are potentially natural antimicrobial agents against Salmonella enterica. The 
concentrations of caffeine found in coffee extracts are enough to warrant 50% of the 

 
 
5 | P a g e  
 
antimicrobial effect against S. enterica, which is relevant to human safety (Almeida et al, 
2006).  
Instead of pointing to coffee as its own preservative when cold brewing, rather consider the 
above evidence as beneficial to maintaining gut health.  Drinking a couple of glasses of clean, 
safely prepared cold brew could contribute to overall gastrointestinal well-being.  With this 
in mind, an especially healthy specific coffee roasted conscientiously for gut health would 
make an exceptional tonic.  More on this in a bit. 
HEALTHY COLD BREWING POINT 2:   
CHOOSE A ROAST LEVEL AND GRIND SIZE OPTIMUM FOR ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY 
The most significant healthy, antioxidant compounds impacted by brewing temperature are 
chlorogenic acids (CGA). Of all plant constituents, coffee has one of the greatest 
concentrations of CGA. Because of the high content of CGA, coffee is considered the most 
important contributor to antioxidant intake in many populations, since people drink it 
habitually and, in many cases, multiple times a day.   
In one study, CGA and caffeine were found at higher concentrations in cold brew coffee 
made with medium roast coffees, rather than dark roast. The grind size did not impact CGA 
and caffeine concentrations of cold brew samples significantly, but caffeine concentrations 
in cold brew coarse grind samples were considerably higher than their hot brew equivalents. 
CGA concentrations and pH were comparable between cold and hot brews, so any perceived 
lower acidity of cold brew is not due to CGA content. Considering that most acids in coffee 
are highly soluble and extract quickly, this indicates that the difference in acidity of cold 
brew coffee is likely not due to CGA or caffeine concentrations (Fuller & Rao, 2017). 
Interestingly, this same study determined that caffeine and CGA concentrations reached 
equilibrium according to first order kinetics between 6 and 7 hours instead of 10 to 24 hours 
outlined in typical cold brew methods.  Brewing times near 400 minutes are adequate to 
extract the majority of available caffeine and CGA in medium and dark roast beans prepared 
at medium and coarse grinds.  However, no significant differences were seen in CGA 
concentrations between cold and hot brews, due to the solubility of CGA. 
In sharp contrast, another study found that considering grind size, particles of 0.65mm had 
significantly higher antioxidant potential than 1.15mm and 1.65mm. For brew time, 24 hours 
had the lowest antioxidant potential, 18 hours was better, but 30 hours had twice as much 
antioxidant potential as the 18-hour brew (Morrisey, 2019).  The researcher’s final 
recommendation was, “If brewing cold brew coffee for 18 hours, a smaller grind size 

 
 
6 | P a g e  
 
(0.65mm) would yield significantly higher antioxidant potential than coarser grind sizes 
(1.15mm and 1.65mm).” 
HEALTHY COLD BREWING POINT 3:   
CHOOSE A GRIND SIZE AND ROAST LEVEL FOR GUT HEALTH 
An additional study indicated that cold coffee brewed under coarse grinding and 22 hours of 
extraction exhibited the highest values of total dissolved solids, extraction yield, pH, 
titratable acidity and CGA content (Cordoba, 2019).   A quick mention of the difference of pH 
and titratable acidity:  pH represents how much acid is in the brewed coffee, regardless of 
how strong the acid tastes; whereas a titration measures how strong that acid tastes.  Coffee 
has numerous acids, like citric, malic, acetic, lactic, etc.  Each acid has a different strength of 
tartness on the tongue and different molar weight.  
In a previous Purity Coffee blog post, we delved into acidity and how much it impacts 
gastrointestinal issues (particularly acid reflux).  Coffee studies on stomach and 
gastrointestinal issues are an area of active research and conclusions vary widely. Toxins 
have been known to cause stomach issues and may be in lower quality and stale coffee. 
Some chemical compounds naturally found in coffee may stimulate gastric acid production, 
but the research results on this topic are mixed, depending on the type of coffee and a 
person’s genetics. The pH values of the cold and hot brew samples were found to be 
comparable, ranging from 4.85 to 5.13, which, incidentally, are the same ranges of bananas, 
pumpkin and watermelon. In other words, although the blogosphere accuses the acidity of 
being the culprit for heartburn, it is likely some other compounds are to blame. These 
compounds may be related to poor quality coffee that contain mycotoxins or rancid oils.  Or 
it may be the caffeine. 
In Cordoba’s (et. al.) study, all cold brew coffee samples had lower titratable acidity values 
than their hot counterparts, but hot brew had more CGA. Cold brew coffees prepared using 
14 hours and a coarse grind scored the highest taste points with strong sweetness, medium 
bitterness and acidity.  These are the common characteristics quoted about cold brew 
everywhere on the internet, however brewing technique can provide a much wider range of 
experiences. 
Cordoba also noted that particle size distribution from the grinder played a large role in the 
chemical composition of cold brew coffee.  Having a narrow grind size distribution is 
important for evenly transferring of soluble compounds into the brew. This means that the 
more accurate your grinder is, where it has a narrow range of size particles (they are more 

 
 
7 | P a g e  
 
uniform—not having some like powder while others are like chunks), the more you can focus 
on adjusting for the compounds that you want to bring out in the coffee. 
The most remarkable research specific to cold brew and gut health was conducted in 2017 
by Kwang-Soon Shin in South Korea and revolved around the crude polysaccharides (CCP-0) 
and their immune-stimulating activities.  CCP-0 are carbohydrates that boost the immunity 
of your digestive system and are mainly comprised of galactose, mannose, arabinose and 
uronic acid. Results of the research indicate that CCP-0 isolated from cold-brew coffee can 
serve as an inducer of the systemic immune system and activate macrophage function and 
intestinal immunity.  Macrophages and dendritic cells are distributed throughout the body 
and play important roles in pathogen detection and tissue homeostasis (Cain et al, 2013).  
In addition, Peyer’s patches are lymphoid tissues distributed throughout the small intestine 
and the ileum and contain lymphocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells and microfold cells 
(important for antigen uptake). Peyer’s patches serve as the immune system of the gut, 
where foods and potentially pathogens are first absorbed in the body. Studies have been 
reported on the activation of the systemic immune system through the activation of the 
intestinal immune system. CCP- 0’s effect on the intestinal immune system demonstrated 
that granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor production increased significantly, 
and bone-marrow-cell proliferation increased by more than 40% (Shin, 2017). 
Melanoidins are what make coffee (and other foods) brown when roasted, baked or toasted.  
They are formed during the Maillard reaction, when sugars and amino acids combine at high 
temperatures and low water activity. They may be considered bioactive compounds 
(Bekedam, E.K., et. al., 2008). The extent of roasting-induced antioxidant formation is linked 
to the extent of melanoidin formation, and the longer we roast, the more intermediate and 
high-molecular-weight melanoidins are produced. In other words, dark roast has higher 
melanoidin composition. 
Coffee melanoidins may act as soluble fiber enhancing  immune-stimulating properties and 
contributing significantly to reducing the risk of colon cancer (Vitaglione, 2012; Moreira, 
2015; Fogliano, 2011). This likely happens by  decreasing colon inflammation through 
improved microbiota balance (prebiotic effect) and by  increasing the elimination rate of 
carcinogens through higher colon motility (urge to use the bathroom). In other words, 
melanoidins can function as an antioxidant dietary fiber and act like a ‘sponge’ for free 
radicals in the gut.  
Coffee melanoidins may act to promote the growth of a beneficial colon microbiota, 
affecting inflammatory pathways in the colon and consequently in the liver. Oddly, 
antioxidative structures formed in coffee melanoidins are similar to vitamin E. These appear 

 
 
8 | P a g e  
 
to activate their scavenging properties gradually (Bekedam, 2008). The antioxidant activity of 
melanoidins isolated from different brews was studied, and some showed that the radical 
scavenging ability of coffee melanoidins was higher in the dark-roasted coffee,  others 
exhibited higher radical scavenging activity. 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
BASIC RECIPE FOR COLD BREW COFFEE 
Goal:  To extract as many pleasing flavors as possible (you decide!) from the ground coffee 
beans into the cup and create a balanced and delicious beverage to meet your health 
targets. 
How:  There are numerous methods of preparing cold brew, but they all come down to 
immersing coffee in cold water over a certain amount of time, depending on how important 
the extraction of different compounds is for you.  For maximum antioxidant extraction, the 
research we presented indicates in general that about 24 hours is good. 
Below is a basic recipe, which hopefully you can apply to any cold brew device.  Using a 
French press most easily demonstrates the basic principles of cold brewing that can be 
applied to other methods. 
 
Link to Bodum cold brew press shown 
here.  However, any French press 
from any manufacturer works for the 
recipe below. 
 

 
 
9 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Device: French press with about 1.5 liter capacity 
 Filter: Stainless steel mesh included with French press (some presses have filters with 
other materials). 
 Coffee: Medium-coarsely ground. 125g (4.5 oz or approximately 1.5 measuring cups 
firmly packed coffee grounds). 
 Water: 1000ml (appx. 32 oz) — cold or room temperature, clean.   
 For a  more concentrated cold brew, try 100g of coffee with 500 ml of water.   
 For a less concentrated brew, try 100g coffee with 1000 ml of water. 
 Time: 24 hours (give or take 6 hours) 
1. Grind the coffee fresh just before mixing the coffee and water together in the carafe. Make sure all 
the grounds are saturated with water. 
2. The grounds will have risen to the top of the carafe, which is called the “crust”.  Stir again after 5 
minutes using your spoon to break the crust and submerge the grounds. 
3. Place the French press plunger in the carafe and push it down slightly below the surface to keep the 
grounds submerged.  Let the cover of the press close the top of the carafe, so that no foreign odors or 
particles get into the cold brew. 
4. Place the French press in the refrigerator for at least 8 hours, but more like 16-24 hours. 
5. Filter the cold brew concentrate by slowly pushing down on the plunger.  The coarser grinds will act 
like a net for the finer particles, most of which would have likely fallen to the bottom of the flask 
anyway by this time. 
 If you are watching your cholesterol, you may want to do an additional step of filtering your 
coffee through a funnel with a paper filter.  This will trap much of the oils that have been 
shown to be of concern for those with high cholesterol. 
6. Create your final beverage by diluting with water or ice and combining it with whatever other 
ingredients you like.   
 Try the cold brew without any additives first.  See what flavors emerge and then decide what 
else to put with it.  You may decide you do not need any sweetener, if you normally add it. 
 Studies indicate that adding dairy milk products reduce the bioavailability of the CGA (Farah, 
2006). 
7. Store the cold brew concentrate in the fridge for up to 10 days. Mark the expiration date yourself with 
masking tape and a marker. 
8. When the cold brew is finished, thoroughly clean the French press carafe, filter (take it apart), and lid, 
making sure each tiny nook and cranny has been sanitized.  Air dry and store in a hygienic area. 
 

 
 
10 | P a g e  
 
CHART OF BREWING VARIABLES FOR COLD BREW COFFEE 
 
VARIABLES AND CHOICES FOR COLD BREWING 
COMPONENT 
KEY CONSIDERATIONS 
OPTIONS 
Quality of the water used 
(no chlorine, some mineral 
content, but not too much) 
Clean/fresh, odor free, clear color. NO chlorine.   
Essentially, look for water with some mineral content.  
The coffee flavors seem to be brought out more with 
total dissolved minerals between 75 - 250 mg/l (calcium 
17 - 85 mg/l, sodium around 10 m/l), and pH between 
6.5 - 7.5. 
Distilled water is not optimal.   
“Spring water” is good.   
Pure, chemical-free water is good to use. 
Type of brewing device (and 
filter method) 
Glass, metal or other non-breakable material for the 
flask.   
Filters could be metal, cloth or paper. Paper filters 
remove much of the natural coffee oils.  This is 
preferable for people watching their cholesterol, but 
the oils have some great health benefits, particularly for 
the liver. 
How much space is in your fridge?  Shelf height?  
You can cold brew with any pitcher or jar that has a lid 
(keeps odors and microscopic stuff floating around your 
fridge out of the coffee). Consider how you will filter or 
sieve from a jar. You can use a pour-over coffee maker or 
a Chemex with a paper filter, to strain out the grounds. 
You can re-purpose a French press. 
Various cold brew devices are on the market. Some have 
filters that sit in the center of the flask.  Others are like 
French presses. 
Ratio of coffee to water 
used 
How strong do you normally like your coffee? Will you 
be adding ice? Will you use the cold coffee as an 
ingredient among others?  If so, how prominent do you 
want the coffee flavor?  
You’ll need more ground coffee for cold brew than hot 
brew. 
It really depends how concentrated you want it. 
The ratios vary widely.  Adjust to taste!  Start around 1:4 
or 1:5, meaning 1 packed cup of ground coffee to 4 or 5 
cups of water. Or 100 g for 500 ml water. 
I am happy with  100 g of Purity Dark Roast coffee for 
1000 ml of water, which is 1:10! 
 
Appropriate grind size  
• 
Grind fresh just before brewing. 
• 
Larger particles release flavor more slowly 
• 
Smaller particles release flavor more quickly and 
may add bitterness 
• 
Darker roasts are more brittle, and usually more 
compounds are extracted from the same size 
grind as less dark roasts.  This is similar with Swiss 
Water Decaf coffees, too. 
Use a medium-coarse grind, similar to coarse salt or ½ 
the particle size of decorator’s sugar.  
Too fine coffee will taste over-extracted and make the 
coffee “muddy”. 
Temperature of the water 
Room temperature water or below.   
Continue the brew in the fridge. 
Between 34º-80ºF (1.1º-26.7ºC) 
Length of brew time 
Which health benefits do you look for? The longer the 
coffee steeps, the more it will extract, although some 
research showed that 8 hours was sufficient, we can be 
fairly certain that by 30 hours the coffee will have 
reached equilibrium and no further compounds will be 
released.   
Experiment.  Try 8 hours.  Try 12 hours. Try 18 to 30 
hours and try to observe how the cold brew effects your 
body and mind.  Do you focus better with coffee brewed 
for 24 hours?   
 
 

 
 
11 | P a g e  
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Almeida A, Naghetini C., Santos V, Glória M. 2004. In Vitro antimicrobial activity of coffee extracts 
on Streptococcus mutans. In 20th International Conference on Coffee Science, Bangalore, India. 
Proceedings of ASIC Conferences. pp 242-248. 
2. Almeida, A., Farah, A. Silva, D., Nunan, E. Glória, B. 2006. Antibacterial Activity of Coffee Extracts 
and Selected Coffee Chemical Compounds against Enterobacteria. J. Agric. Food Chem., 54, 8738-
8743. 
3. Baranowski J., Nagel C. 1982. Inhibition of Pseudomonas fluorescens by hydroxycinnamic acids 
and their alkyl esters. J. Food Sci., 47, 1587-1589. 
4. Bekedam E, Loots M, Schols H, Van Boekel M, Smit G 2008. Roasting Effects on Formation 
Mechanisms of Coffee Brew Melanoidins. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008, 56, 16, 7138–7145 
5. Cain D, O’Koren E, Kan M,  Womble M, Sempowski G, Hopper K, Gunn M, Kelsoe G.  2013. 
Identification of a Tissue-Specific, C/EBPb-Dependent Pathway of Differentiation for Murine 
Peritoneal Macrophages. www.jimmunol.org/content/early/2013/09/27/jimmunol.1300581. 
6. Cordoba N, Pataquiva L,  Osorio C,  Moreno F, Ruiz RY. 2019. Effect of grinding, extraction time 
and type of coffee on the physicochemical and flavour characteristics of cold brew coffee. 
www.nature.com/scientificreports. 9:8440 
7. Daeschel M, Armbrust N, Vieru C. 2017. Survival of non-spore forming foodborne pathogens in 
cold brewed coffee. https://mountaincity.com/images/Cold-Brew-Study.pdf, 
https://www.mintel.com/blog/drink-market-news/the-strength-of-cold-brew, 
https://www.naturalgrocers.com/product-recall/voluntary-recall-califia-farmsmocha-cold-brew-
coffee 
8. Daglia M., Cuzzoni MT, Dacarro C. 1994. Antibacterial  Activity of coffee. J. Agric. Food Chem., 42, 
2270-2277. 
9. Farah A. editor (2019). Coffee: Production, Quality and Chemistry. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
10. Farah A. editor (2019). Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
11. Farah A. (2018) Nutritional and health effects of coffee. Lashermes P. (ed.), Achieving sustainable 
cultivation of coffee, Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing, Cambridge, UK., 1-31. 
12. Farah A. (2013). Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention. IFTPress, Ch. 2, 22-58. 
13. Farah A., de Paulis T., Moreira D.P., Trugo C., Martin P. (2006). Chlorogenic Acids and Lactones in 
Regular and Water-Decaffeinated Arabica Coffees. Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 374-381. 
14. Farah A., de Paulis T., Trugo C., Martin P. (2005). Effect of Roasting on the Formation of 
Chlorogenic Acid Lactones in Coffee. Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 1505-1513. 
15. Fogliano ,V., and Morales F. J. (2011). Estimation of dietary intake of melanoidins from coffee 
and bread. Food Funct. 2, 117–123. 
16. Fuller M.  Rao, N. 2017. The Effect of Time, Roasting Temperature, and Grind Size on Caffeine and 
Chlorogenic Acid Concentrations in Cold Brew Coffee. www.nature.com/scientificreports. 7:17979. 

 
 
12 | P a g e  
 
17. Garrote, G., Cruz, J., Moure, A., Dominguez, H., Parajo, J. 2004. Antioxidant activity of byproducts 
from the hydrolytic processing of selected lignocellulosic materials. Trends Food Sci. Technol., 15, 
191-200. 
18. Lee T, Kempthorne R, Hardy J. 1992. Compositional changes in brewed coffee as a function of 
brewing time. J Food Sci 57(6):1417-9. 
19. Lopez J. 2020. Cold Brew Coffee Regulations and Policies. New York State Department of 
Agriculture & Markets, Division of Food Safety & Inspection, International Food Protection 
Training Institute (IFPTI), Cohort VIII. 
20. Morrisey A. 2019. The Effect of Grind Size and Brew Time upon Antioxidant Potential, Sensory 
Profile, and Consumer Likability of Cold Brew Coffee. Montclair State University Digital Commons. 
Theses, Dissertations and Culminating Projects.  
21. Moreira A. S. P., Nunes F. M., Domingues M. R., and Coimbra M. A., (2012). Coffee 
melanoidins: structure, mechanisms of formation and potential health impacts. Food Funct 3, 
903–915. 
22. Shin K-W. 2017. The Chemical Characteristics and Immune-Modulating Activity of Polysaccharides 
Isolated from Cold-Brew Coffee. Prev. Nutr. Food Sci. 22(2):100-106. 
23. Vitaglione P., Morisco F., Mazzone G., Amoruso D. C., Ribecco M. T., Romano A., Fogliano V., 
Caporaso N., and D’Argenio G. (2010). Coffee reduces liver damage in a rat model of 
steatohepatitis: the underlying mechanisms and the role of polyphenols and melanoidins. 
Hepatology, 52, 1652–1661. 
24. Zuniga M. (2016, May 16). Cold brew: Category or craze? Re;co: The Specialty Coffee 
Symposium. https://youtu.be/5KFo4c0UlLg. 
 
