See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379668723
Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture Chapter 12 Conservation
Practices for Maintenance of Natural enemies in Agro Ecosystem
Chapter · April 2024
CITATIONS
0
READS
122
3 authors, including:
Heera Kumari
Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University Jobner Jaipur
10 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Sheetal Kumawat
Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University
19 PUBLICATIONS   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Heera Kumari on 09 April 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
147 
 
Chapter 12 
Conservation Practices for Maintenance of Natural enemies in Agro 
Ecosystem 
                          Heera Kumari1, Sheetal Kumawat2 and Arti Sharma3 
1,2 & 3Ph.D.  Research Scholar, Department of Agricultural Entomology 
S.K.N. College of Agriculture, Jobner, Rajasthan 
email: 1998heeranu@gmail.com  
ABSTRACT: 
Conservation biological control enhances the effectiveness of indigenous natural enemies and 
encompasses two strategies. Ecological manipulation of the agroecosystem entails enhancing 
conditions conducive to natural enemies. The alternative approach involves manipulating the 
balance between natural enemies and pests by employing insecticides in a targeted manner. The 
techniques of ecological manipulation include providing adult beneficial insects with pollen 
and nectar sources for sustenance, increasing floral diversity to bolster populations of insects 
serving as alternative prey for beneficials, potentially introducing specific plant species to 
support crucial alternate hosts for predators or parasitoids, or utilizing plant diversity to elevate 
crop humidity levels. While these methods have long existed, their widespread adoption has 
occurred more recently due to increased societal and governmental demands for environmental 
sustainability, alongside the rising tolerance of pests to conventional insecticides. While few 
insecticides inherently favor natural enemies, selectivity of broad-spectrum compounds can be 
achieved by reducing dosage or limiting application temporally or spatially. Regardless of the 
chosen approach, practical implementation is typically straight forward. 
Keywords: biological control, conventional insecticides, parasitoids, selectivity, alternate host 
INTRODUCTION: 
Conservation means the avoidance of measures that destroy natural enemies and the use of 
measure that increase their longevity and reproduction of the attractiveness of an area to natural 
enemies. If the natural enemies are properly conserved the need for other control measures is 
greatly reduced. 
Conservation of natural enemies: 
Protection from Pesticides, Resistant or Tolerant Natural Enemies, Preservation of Inactive 
Stages, Avoidance of Harmful Cultural Practices, Maintenance of Diversity and Necessary 
Hosts, Alternate Hosts, Natural Foods (Nectar, Pollen, and Honeydew), Artificial Food 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
148 
 
Supplements, Artificial Shelters, Reduction of Undesirable Predators, Control of Honeydew-
Feeding Ants, Favorable Temperature 
 
Complete removal of maize may eliminate natural enemies (A) or after roses cutting (B).  
CASE STUDY – Improved natural enemy function using HIPVs  
The 2-year (2011-12) field project in the cranberry system assessed whether lures baited with 
methyl salicylate, a signaling HIPV known to attract natural enemies, increased natural enemy 
abundance in cranberry plots in Chatsworth, New Jersey (USA). [Salamanca, et al., (2019) M]. 
Natural enemy function (i.e., predation) was assessed by deploying sentinel egg masses 
(nonviable egg masses at specific densities) and determining predator activity. The HIPV lures 
increased the abundance of predatory mites, syrphid flies, and lady beetles, but not parasitic 
wasps. The HIPV lures increased predation of sentinel lepidopteran egg masses, and the 
predators visiting the eggs correlated with the predators attracted to the environment. However, 
the methyl salicylate lures also recruited several pest herbivores to the habitat and repelled 
spiders, so care must be taken to identify if critical pest herbivores are being attracted and/or 
key natural enemies are being repelled with this method.  
Conservation biological control (CBC): is the concept of increasing the impact on the pest 
of natural enemies that are already present in the agroecosystem. This contrasts with ‘classical 
biological control’, which involve importing a new natural enemy from a foreign country. We 
distinguish two approaches to CBC. The first is ecological engineering of agroecosystems. This 
term has the advantage over the more frequently used ‘habitat manipulation’ that it emphasizes 
pest-targeted design. The approach involves improving the environment to the benefit of 
natural enemies. The second approach is very different and often overlooked as a technique of 
CBC. It involves the conservation or partial conservation of natural enemies when insecticides 
are used by using the latter in such a way that they have a greater impact on the pest than on its 
natural enemy(ies) (Emden, 2004.)  

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
149 
 
ECOLOGICAL ENGINEERING OF AGROECOSYSTEMS: 
We have four main tools in this approach. How they are deployed in CBC will be described 
later: 
1. Provision of flowers, from which the adults of many natural enemies feed on pollen 
and/or nectar to mature their eggs and increase their growth (if immature) and longevity 
(Gurr et al., 1998). 
2. Increasing plant biodiversity encourages insect herbivores (alternative prey) on which 
natural enemies can sustain themselves when the pest is scarce. 
3. Establishing alternate (as opposed to alternative) prey – where natural enemies require 
more than one species of prey at different times of their annual life cycle. 
4. A damper microclimate in the crop tends to benefit natural enemies. 
All four tools have been known for many years. Previously in 1938, the importance of flowers 
for natural enemies was shown in regard to the braconid parasitoid Orgilus obscurator (Nees), 
which provides effective biological control of the pine shoot moth (Rhyacionia buoliana (Denis 
& Schiffermüller)) in the UK (Harris, 1960). Newly-emerged parasitoids are repelled by the 
smell of pine oil, and so leave the trees to feed and mate on flowers outside the forest. When 
the eggs are mature, behaviour reverses. Pine oil odour is now attractive, and so the females 
are pulled back into the forest to parasitise the pine shoot moth caterpillars (Thorpe and Caudle, 
1938). 
An early report of the value of alternative prey comes from Finland (Gyorfi J.) and concerns 
the gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar (L.)). This pest has occasional outbreak years in which the 
caterpillars can potentially defoliate oak forests.These outbreaks are naturally controlled by a 
complex of some six parasitoid species, provided these have been able to survive on alternative 
hosts during the years between gypsy moth outbreaks. In the Finnish work, 34 alternative hosts 
were identified in the oak canopy, but even more (45 species) were found on the vegetation on 
the forest floor of forests that were not managed too intensively. 
An example of alternate prey, that is, where a second species of prey is needed for a 
natural enemy to complete its annual life cycle, concerns the parasitoid Diadegma fenestrale 
(Holmgren), which gives good biological control on brassicas of the diamond-back moth 
(Plutella xylostella (L.)) in the UK (Hardy JE). The adult parasitoid emerges from its caterpillar 
host before the latter overwinters. In 1939, it was already realised (Muggeridge J.) that the 
parasitoids complete an overwintering generation in some other caterpillar before new 
diamond-back moth caterpillars become available the next spring. This other host species, an 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
150 
 
essential link in maintaining the valuable biological control given by Diadegma, remained 
unknown until 1953 when O.W. Richards of Imperial College recognised the wasp emerging 
from a caterpillar of the moth Paraswammerdamia lutarea (Haworth) that he had collected 
from hawthorn. Incidentally, between 1938 and 1953, farmers in East Anglia had been busy 
ripping out hawthorn stock barriers to increase the size of their fields (Shoard M.) in a switch 
to arable farming, often of brassicas. 
Finally, in the 1940s, coffee farmers originating from Europe demonstrated the benefits 
for biological control agents of a high humidity when they decided to raise coffee yields in 
Africa by removing the shade trees under which coffee was traditionally grown. Unfortunately, 
the resulting high insolation led to the disappearance of parasitoids, which had previously 
prevented the antestia bug (Antestiopsis spp.), which can taint the whole bean crop at only two 
individuals per coffee tree, from being a problem (Taylor TCH). 
These examples of the four tools we use in ecological engineering were all recorded 
over 70 years ago, but at that time made no impact on how pests were controlled in agriculture 
and horticulture. There are four main explanations for this lack of interest: 
1. Insecticides were highly effective and their problems had not yet become an issue. 
2. The mindset was still that biological control meant importing foreign natural enemies. 
3. Floral diversity on farms was equated with encouraging weeds. 
4. Reaching for the spray gun was a lot simpler than trying to get one’s head around 
biodiversity. 
Plant diversity can be added inside or outside the crop, and this could form a basis for listing 
the examples. If one did this, one would find that the majority of examples of diversity outside 
the crop have been proposed by entomologists, whereas most of those concerning diversity 
inside the crop have been designed by cropping system scientists for agronomic benefits, but 
also have potential benefit for biological control. However, this review will list the examples 
under the four tools for ecological engineering mentioned earlier. 
PROVISION OF FLOWERS AS SOURCES OF POLLEN AND NECTAR: 
Adding pollen and nectar sources to farmland has been practised widely in both the Northern 
and Southern Hemispheres. Buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum Moench) is frequently the 
flower of choice, and New Zealand is just one country where this plant is often grown as a strip 
at the edges of cereal fields (Fig. 1) to provide adult food for parasitoids in general as well as 
for hover flies, the larvae of which are voracious predators of aphids. Two other flowering 
plants commonly used in this way are sweet alyssum (Lobularia maritima (L.) Desvaux) and 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
151 
 
white mustard (Sinapis arvensis L.). However, even though such plantings usually increase the 
numbers of natural enemies, reductions of pest populations are less consistently demonstrated. 
 
Fig.1 Buckwheat grown at the edge of a cereal field to provide pollen and nectar, particularly 
for adult hover flies. the larvae of which are voracious predators of aphids (Source: Hickman 
and Wratten).  
PROVISION OF ALTERNATIVE PREY: 
During intervals between harvesting and planting new crops, such as during rotations, 
herbivores in bordering vegetation and adjacent uncultivated areas serve as prey for a reservoir 
of natural enemies. These predators are then available to migrate onto the new crop when it 
faces pest attacks from external sources. A notable and pertinent illustration of this concept is 
found in the management of wheat stem sawfly (Cephus cinctus Norton) in Canada. A strip of 
sterile brome grass (Bromus sterilis L.), measuring 15–20 meters, is sown as a trap crop along 
the field edges. As the sawflies fly close to the ground, they encounter the brome grass and 
perceive it as a suitable host for egg-laying. The larvae bore into the grass stems; however, 
there is no necessity to eradicate the trap crop or treat it with insecticide since the slender grass 
stems lack sufficient nourishment to sustain the larvae to pupation (Thomas and Bradshaw, 
2020). Consequently, the brome grass serves as a cul-de-sac for wheat stem sawflies. 
DIVERSITY STRIPS: 
The outer spray boom was switched off when spraying insecticides and herbicides along the 
field margins (Fig.2). This allowed the partridges to flourish again and with little yield loss, as 
the edge of the field always has a lower yield with weed competition and often less thorough 
tillage. 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
152 
 
Fig.2 Modified headland spraying of wheat. Above, sprayer with outside boom switched off 
at field edge; below, resulting effect on headland plant diversity (Source: N. W. Sotherton). 
The UK government is among those who provide ‘agrienvironment scheme’ grants to farmers 
to grow flowering plants on parts of their land. These schemes are largely targeted to benefit 
pollinators, but of course provide another source of diversity strips. Increasingly councils are 
not cutting roadside verges as frequently as before and are seeding the verges with wildflower 
mixes that provide diversity strips (Fig.3). This is a ‘win-win’ situation. The public applaud the 
biodiversity, especially in relation to pollinators, while the councils save the cost of frequent 
verge cutting. Another manifestation of diversity strips is the seed mixes sown between the 
rows in orchards, very much aiming at the biological control of orchard pests (Stephens et al., 
1998).  
Fig.3:Flowering roadside verge in Lincolnshire, U.K. 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
153 
 
 
Fig.4 Buckwheat strips sown in a vineyard in New Zealand (Source: S.D. Wratten). 
Intercropping, a practice dating back centuries, encompasses various forms of plant diversity. 
An example, prevalent in Africa, involves cultivating maize alongside cowpea between rows. 
While not originally intended for biological control purposes, intercropping typically yields 
such benefits. Natural enemies often utilize insects on both crops as alternative hosts, and the 
increased humidity near the soil benefits predators and parasitoids alike. However, there exists 
at least one intercropping system developed by entomologists explicitly for managing maize 
stem borer (Busseola fusca (Fuller)) in Africa (Pickett, 2014). 
 
Fig.5 The ‘push-pull’ intercropping system in maize in Ethiopia, involving the legume 
Desmodium and Napier grass as the two intercrops (photo courtesy of ICIPE, The International 
Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology).  

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
154 
 
ALTERNATE HOSTS: 
A good example of a biological control agent unable to survive in an agroecosystem without 
the availability of an insect host/prey other than the pest requiring control is Anagrus 
erythroneurae S. Trjapitzin & Chiappini, a small parasitoid of the eggs of the grape leafhopper 
(Erythroneura elegantula Osborn). This pest overwinters as an adult, whereas Anagrus 
overwinters in leafhopper eggs.  
Therefore, Californian wine growers have planted blackberries in the vineyards to 
encourage the blackberry leafhopper (Dikrella californica (Lawson)), which overwinters in the 
egg stage and so enables Anagrus to survive (Doutt and Nakata). I have heard of visitors to the 
Napa Valley vineyards of California expressing surprise that no one bothers to control weed 
blackberries. 
IMPROVED MICROCLIMATE: 
Ground beetles (Carabidae) play a crucial role as predators, targeting the eggs of various root 
pests such as carrot fly and cabbage root fly. In cereal crops, they contribute to pest control by 
preying on aphids that fall from the plants onto the soil, and they may even ascend plants to 
feed on aphids residing on stems and leaves. During autumn, they migrate to drier locations to 
overwinter, often congregating in grass tussocks near hedges at the edges of fields. To expand 
arable land, many farmers have replaced hedges between fields with post and strand fencing. 
Underneath such fencing, grass tussocks (referred to as "beetle banks") can be established. 
 
Fig.6 A grassy conservation ridge in wheat in South England (photo courtesy of S.D. Wratten).  
 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
155 
 
However, when beetles disperse from these banks in spring, their movement into the 
crop is limited. During periods when wheat prices were favorable, it became economically 
feasible for farmers to construct elongated ridges seeded with grass across fields (Thomas MB, 
Wratten SD,1992). These grassy ridges, known as "conservation ridges" (Fig.6), were designed 
to accommodate tractor passage at each end and would remain intact for several years before 
requiring restoration. Some farmers converted them into diversity strips by incorporating 
flower seeds into the seed mix. 
SELECTIVE INSECTICIDE USE: 
This second approach to conservation biological control may appear to be contradictory in 
terms. However, using insecticide to improve biological control is based on a very simple 
concept, that the ratio of natural enemies to pests is more important than their number. This is 
illustrated in the cartoon of 15 aphids and 5 ladybirds (Fig. 7a). If a broad-spectrum insecticide 
kills the same proportion of pests and natural enemies (Fig. 7b), biological control is not 
affected, since the ratio of aphids to ladybirds has not changed from 3:1. However, if the 
insecticide is just slightly selective and kills one more aphid (Fig. 7c), the ratio for biological 
control has improved to 2.5:1.  
 
Fig.7 Cartoon illustrating the concept of ‘partial selectivity’ of an insecticide application. a, 
The unsprayed population of aphids and ladybirds in a 3:1 ratio; b, insects killed (greyed out) 
by a non-selective spray maintaining the 3:1 ratio and c, a partially selective spray improving 
the ratio to 2.5:1 by killing just one more aphid. 
The tools for using insecticides proactively to improve biological control are as follows:  
1. Use of a selective or partially selective insecticide.  
2. Applying the insecticide at a reduced dose.  

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
156 
 
3. Using time of application to achieve selectivity.  
4. Restricting the area to which the insecticide is applied. 
SELECTIVE INSECTICIDES: 
Occasionally, the agrochemical industry stumbles upon insecticides that are selectively 
or partially selective, exerting less toxicity on natural enemies compared to pests. An excellent 
illustration is the carbamate pirimicarb. Despite the potential benefits, such insecticides are 
often not favored by the industry due to limited market potential. Consequently, pirimicarb 
remained shelved after its discovery. However, it was resurrected from the industrial 'recycle 
bin' when a crisis involving insecticide-resistant aphids in glasshouses created a lucrative 
market for the chemical, especially when used in combination with biological control methods.  
Subsequently, it found application in other scenarios to optimize conservation 
biological control (CBC). Furthermore, pirimicarb boasts a high level of safety for humans. 
Nonetheless, it has been unfairly grouped with other carbamate compounds and subjected to 
widespread restrictions, with many jurisdictions implementing bans on its usage. 
REDUCED DOSE:  
A classic case involves the management of organophosphate-resistant spotted alfalfa 
aphids (Therioaphis trifolii maculata (Buckton)). Accidentally introduced from Europe to 
California in the late 1940s, by the mid-1950s, these aphids had developed resistance to 
insecticides to the extent that farmers were considering abandoning alfalfa cultivation. The 
counterintuitive recommendation to apply organophosphates, albeit at a reduced dosage, on 
organophosphate-resistant aphids proved remarkably effective, resolving the aphid issue within 
approximately two years. This groundbreaking approach was documented in a seminal paper 
titled 'The integrated control concept' (Stern et al., 1959), which serves as the cornerstone of 
modern Integrated Pest Management (IPM). 
The authors estimated that a half-dose organophosphate would still kill about 20% of 
the aphids, but many natural enemies would survive to control the aphids that survived the 
insecticide. Why does reducing dose give the insecticide application beneficial selectivity? In 
fact, it is almost inevitable, because of a basic biochemical difference between herbivores and 
carnivores (Fig.8).  

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
157 
 
 
Fig.8 The difference in slope of the sigmoid curves of increasing kill of a herbivore (green) and 
a carnivore (red) as insecticide concentration is increased, caused by the wider range (green 
bar) of concentration covering zero to 100% kill for the former compared with the carnivore 
(red bar) (Emden, 2004). 
SELECTIVITY IN TIME: 
In Nigeria, observations revealed a behavior pattern in the cowpea leafhopper (Empoasca 
dolichi Paoli): during daytime heat, it resides on the underside of lower cowpea leaves, but at 
dusk, it relocates to the upper leaf surface to feed during the night. Given that natural enemies 
are active during the day and do not pursue the leafhopper to its new feeding location, an 
opportunity for selective control arises. Applying a light mist of a short-lived insecticide to the 
upper leaves at dusk effectively achieves the desired outcome (Emden, 2004). 
SELECTIVITY IN SPACE:  
 
Today, advancements such as GPS technology and tractor-mounted receivers offer the 
possibility of precision spraying, potentially down to the level of individual plants, aided by 
satellites that can detect subtle color changes indicative of pest infestations. However, 
widespread commercial implementation of this concept is still on the horizon. Meanwhile, less 
sophisticated methods for selective insecticide application have proven successful, with a 
notable example dating back to 1963. 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
158 
 
 
Fig.9 Swath harvesting illustrates the principle of alternate swath treatments of alfalfa (photo 
courtesy of Kim L. Fritzemeier, Kim’s County Line, Stafford, Kansas). With alternate swath 
spraying, of course, the swaths will be as wide as the span of the spray boom.  
The concept of "alternate swath band spraying" is not new (DeBach, 1956) and has been 
effectively utilized in controlling alfalfa aphids in California. In this approach, the spray rig 
intentionally skips a swath width at the end of the field before returning, resulting in only half 
of the field being sprayed during each pass. While aphids on the sprayed swaths are targeted, 
many winged natural enemies are prompted to flee to the untreated swaths as the sprayer passes, 
thereby enhancing biological control in those areas. Subsequent spraying targets the previously 
untreated swaths. This technique seamlessly integrates with alternate swath harvesting in 
alfalfa fields (Fig.9), where young alfalfa is left standing to preserve natural enemies while 
adjacent mature stems are harvested (Godfrey and Leigh, 1994). 
In Australia, a technique involving vertical band spraying has been employed to combat 
the Queensland fruit fly, whose larvae pose a threat by infesting and damaging citrus fruits. 
This method capitalizes on the tendency of most adult flies to roost in the higher humidity 
found in the lower portion of the tree (IUCN SSC, 2009). By targeting the lower half of the 
trees or bushes with spray (Fig.10), the adult fly population can be significantly reduced. 
Similar to the alfalfa example, many airborne biological control agents are disrupted by the  
Fig.10 Citrus grower applying bait to citrus using the ‘continuous stream application’ 
method for localizing the part of the tree sprayed (photo courtesy of “Bugs for Bugs”). spray 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
159 
 
and ascend higher up the tree. Some growers took additional measures by incorporating yeast 
hydrolysate into the spray, which is highly attractive to fruit flies and effectively draws them 
from the untreated portion of the tree to the sprayed lower half. 
CONCLUSIONS:  
Growing public concerns regarding the environmental impact of insecticides, particularly their 
potential harm to pollinators, have led to increased attention on sustainable crop production. 
Biological control methods, particularly those based on naturally occurring predators and 
parasitoids (CBC), offer promising solutions in both these areas. Enhancing floral diversity in 
agricultural landscapes is widely acknowledged as a beneficial approach, as it not only supports 
pollinators but also aids in fostering natural enemies. Sometimes, success may necessitate the 
addition of just one species, either for nectar/pollen provision or to serve as an alternative or 
alternate host for specific natural enemies. Although manipulating insecticide application to 
favor natural enemies is not always recognized as CBC, it represents another viable approach 
to enhancing the control effect of indigenous natural enemies. While inherently selective active 
ingredients are rare, achieving a CBC outcome with broad-spectrum compounds often involves 
some form of temporal or spatial separation between their effects on pests and natural enemies. 
The example involving coffee underscores an important message: simplicity can yield 
effective results. While the literature on biological control often delves into the complex 
dynamics between pests and natural enemies, practical solutions need not be overly 
sophisticated. The scientific basis behind the examples provided, including the use of 
insecticides to enhance biological control, may not be groundbreaking, but they are rooted in 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
160 
 
an understanding of cropping systems and interventions that farmers are willing to adopt and 
implement. Ultimately, successful conservation biological control through both approaches can 
be encapsulated in just three words: "keep it simple." 
It's noteworthy that all the examples of conservation biological control mentioned here 
have been embraced by farmers for their economic benefits within their crop production 
systems at the time of their proposal. However, changes in technical practices, economic 
considerations, and the emergence of new agrochemicals effective against resistant pest 
populations may alter farmers' perceptions of the value of specific CBC programs over time. 
REFERENCES: 
DeBach, P. (1956). Application of ecological information to control of citrus pests in 
California. Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of Entomology, Montreal, 
Canada. 3: 185–97. 
 Doutt, R.L. and Nakata, J. (1965). Parasites for control of grape leafhopper. Hilgardia. 
19(4): 3. 
 
Godfrey, L.D. and Leigh, T.F. (1994). Alfalfa harvest strategy effect on lygus bug 
(Hemiptera: Miridae) and insect predator population density: implications for use as 
trap crop in cotton. Environmental Entomology. 23: 1106–18. 
 Gurr, G.M., Emden, H.F. and Wratten, S.D. (1998). Habitat manipulation and natural enemy 
efficiency: implications for the control of pests. In: Barbosa P, editor. Conservation 
biological control. San Diego (CA), USA: Academic Press. Pp: 155–83. 
 Gyorfi, J. (1951). Die Schlupfwespen und der Unterwuchs des Waldes. Zeitschrift für 
Angewandte. Entomologie. 33: 32–47. 
Hardy, J.E. (1938). Plutella maculipennis Curt.: its natural and biological control in England. 
Bulletin of Entomological Research. 29: 343–72. 
 Harris, P. (1960). Production of pine resin and its effect on survival of Rhyacionia buoliana 
(Schiff.) (Lepidoptera : Olethreutidae). Canadian Journal of Zoology. 38: 121–30.  
Hickman, J.M. and Wratten, S.D. (1993). Use of Phacelia tanacetifolia (Hydrophyllaceae) 
as a pollen resource to enhance hoverfly (Diptera: Syrphidae) populations in 
sweetcorn fields. IOBC/ WRPS Working Group ‘Integrated Control in Cereal 
Crops’ Bulletin. 17(Pt 4): 156–67. 
 Pickett, J.A., Woodcock, C.M., Midega, C.A.O. and Khan, Z.R. (2014). Push–pull farming 
systems. Current Opinion in Biotechnology. 26: 125–32. 

Sustainable Development Goals and Agriculture 
ISBN: 978-93-340-1699-4 
 
161 
 
Salamanca, J. (2019). Methyl salicylate increases attraction and function of beneficial 
arthropods in cranberries. Insects. 10: 423. 
Shoard, M. (1980). The theft of the countryside. London, UK: Maurice Temple Smith. 
Stephens, M.J., France, C.M., Wratten, S.D. and Frampton, C. (1998). Enhancing biological 
control of leafrollers (Lepidoptera, Tortricidae) by sowing buckwheat (Fagopyrum 
esculentum) in an orchard. Biocontrol Science and Technology. 8: 547–58. 
 Stern, V.M.R.F., Smith, R., Van den Bosch, R., and Hagen, K. (1959). The integration of 
chemical and biological control of the spotted alfalfa aphid: the integrated control 
concept. Hilgardia. 29(2): 81-101. 
Taylor, T.C.H. (1940). Report of the entomologist, Kawanda. Report of the Department of 
Agriculture of Uganda. Pp: 9–24. 
Thomas, B., and Bradshaw, J. (2020). Advances in understanding the management of the 
wheat stem sawfly. Crop Production Clinic Proceedings, University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln, USA. 
Thomas MB, Wratten SD and Sotherton NW (1992). Creation of ‘island’ habitats in 
farmland to manipulate populations of beneficial arthropods: predator densities and 
species composition. Journal of Applied Ecology. 2(29): 524–31.  
 Thorpe, W.H. and Caudle, H.B. (1938). A study of the olfactory responses of insect parasites 
to the food plant of their host. Parasitology. 30(4): 523-528. 
Van Emden, H.F. (2004). Pest and vector control. Cambridge University Press. 
Van Emden, H.F. and Williams, G. (1974). Insect stability and diversity in agro-ecosystems. 
Annual Review of Entomology. 19: 455–75.  
Wratten, S.D. and van Emden, H.F. (1995). Habitat management for enhanced activity of 
natural enemies of insect pests. In: Glen DM, Greaves MP, Anderson HM, editors. 
Ecology and integrated farming systems. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Pp: 117–45. 
 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 
View publication stats
