© Hepatitis C Online
PDF created May 23, 2016, 4:34 pm
Counseling Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C
Module 2:
Evaluation, Staging, and Monitoring of Chronic Hepatitis C
Lesson 3:
Counseling Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C
Contents:
Over-the-Counter Medications and Vitamins
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Marijuana
Diet and Modifying Obesity
Complementary and Alternative Medicines
Summary Points
References
Figures
Over-the-Counter Medications and Vitamins
Introduction: Because many medications are metabolized through the liver, it is important for the
medical provider to know all of the medications a patient is taking, including over-the-counter
medications.  A current medication list should be solicited frequently. 
Acetaminophen: Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is a known hepatotoxin that can cause clinically
important hepatotoxicity, either through an acute overdose or when taken on a regular basis (even
at lower doses): in one large study that examined causes of acute liver failure, patients taking a dose
less than 4 grams per day accounted for 7% of the total cases and in some were taking doses as low
as 1 gram per day. Among healthy volunteers taking 4 grams per day for 14 days, more than 30%
developed alanine aminotransferase (ALT) values in excess of 3 times the upper limit of normal.
Concurrent alcohol use greatly increases the chance of acute or chronic acetaminophen-induced
hepatotoxicity. Studies have also shown an increased risk of acute liver injury in patients with
chronic hepatitis C following acetaminophen overdose, but none have examined the safety of long-
term, low dosages of acetaminophen in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Guidelines for the safe use
of acetaminophen in HCV-infected persons do not exist. Considering many patients with chronic
hepatitis C have limited pain treatment options, most experts believe low dosages of acetaminophen
(up to two grams per day) can safely be used in most patients with chronic hepatitis C infection
without cirrhosis; those with cirrhosis should limit their intake of acetaminophen to one gram per
day. Patients drinking excess alcohol should avoid taking acetaminophen altogether. Clinicians
should remind patients that many narcotic combination pills and over-the-counter cold and flu
medications may contain acetaminophen. Patients taking acetaminophen should have laboratory
monitoring for hepatotoxicity every 3 to 6 months.
Aspirin and Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Medications: Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are generally safe for patients with hepatitis C when taken at standard
doses.  The one exception is in patients who have cirrhosis: NSAIDS and aspirin are best avoided in
patients with cirrhosis, especially those with decompensated cirrhosis. In patients with
decompensated cirrhosis, the use of NSAIDS and aspirin may further increase the inherent risk these
patients have for developing nephrotoxicity and gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients with chronic
hepatitis C who do not have cirrhosis may take aspirin or NSAIDs at low or standard recommended
dosages, with food and water.  Those with cirrhosis who have short-term, minor pain should, in
general, avoid taking aspirin or NSAIDs, but can take acetaminophen in this setting as long as the
dose does not exceed one gram per day.  In the unfortunate situation involving a patient with
cirrhosis who has joint or musculoskeletal pain unresponsive to acetaminophen, NSAIDs can be used
for a very brief period of time if given at the lowest daily dose possible.
Iron: Patients with chronic hepatitis C infection may store excess iron in their liver and excess
hepatic iron has been associated with poor outcomes.  Therefore, patients should limit foods high in
iron and avoid cooking in cast iron pans.  Patients taking a daily multivitamin should make sure the
                             1 / 10

multivitamin does not contain iron, unless a compelling reason exists to regularly take iron, such as
iron deficiency anemia from gastrointestinal bleeding.
Vitamin D: Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with chronic hepatitis C and levels of vitamin
D may correlate inversely with liver disease severity.  Several studies have shown patients with low
vitamin D levels have poorer responses to interferon-based therapy, suggesting an important
immunomodulatory role for vitamin D in patients with chronic hepatitis C infection. A more recent
study, however, did not show any correlation with vitamin D levels and sustained virologic
responses. Supplementation of vitamin D in patients who have 25(OH) Vitamin D levels less than 20
ng/mL is recommended, with initial therapy consisting of 50,000 IU of vitamin D once weekly for 8
weeks, to reach 25(OH) vitamin D levels of approximately 30 ng/mL.  Thereafter, patients can take
1500 to 2000 IU per day for maintenance.  For otherwise healthy adults, the Institute of Medicine
recommends 600 IU per day of Vitamin D.
Vitamin A: Intake of vitamin A at levels contained in a multivitamin is considered safe.  Vitamin A is
a fat-soluble vitamin and should only be taken at standard doses of less than 10,000 units per day.
Ingestion of mega-doses of vitamin A may potentially cause hepatotoxicity and is not recommended.
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Marijuana
Alcohol: In the United States, excessive alcohol consumption is one of the most common causes of
cirrhosis and liver failure.  The combination of excessive alcohol use with hepatitis C infection has a
synergistic impact in causing hepatic damage, thereby significantly increasing the risk of developing
cirrhosis and liver complications. It is clear that greater than 50 grams of alcohol per day is clearly
hazardous to liver health, although an exact “safe” level has not been clearly established. Patients
who have cleared hepatitis C, but continue to drink excessive amounts of alcohol, have no
appreciable treatment-related benefit in terms of long-term hepatic complications and liver-induced
mortality.  Further, patients who drink excessive amounts of alcohol during therapy for hepatitis C
have lower sustained virologic response rates.  For these reasons, patients who have hepatitis C and
a history of excessive alcohol use (including alcohol use associated with legal, working, or
relationship problems) should abstain completely from alcohol.  Women who never had an alcohol
problem should have no more than one alcoholic drink per day and men with no history of alcohol
problems should have no more than two alcoholic drinks per day. Patients with alcohol problems
need to quit completely for at least 6 months prior to beginning therapy for hepatitis C.  The Alcohol
Use Disorders Identification Test Consumption questionnaire (AUDIT-C) is a useful screening test for
problem drinking, especially in those who do not specifically admit to it.
Tobacco: The effects of tobacco smoking on the liver are controversial. In a study involving 244
patients with chronic hepatitis C infection, patients who were smokers had increased hepatic
inflammation when compared with non-smokers, but no differences in rates of fibrosis were
observed.  In addition, other studies involving patients with chronic liver disease have shown
increased rates of steatosis and advanced fibrosis, but these studies were retrospective and difficult
to control for concurrent alcohol use and obesity.  It is clear, however, that tobacco use increases the
risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, working synergistically with alcohol and obesity.  Because tobacco
use is associated with numerous adverse health outcomes and may potentially adversely affect the
liver, clinicians should counsel all smokers with chronic hepatitis C infection to quit tobacco
completely.
Marijuana (Cannabis): In two separate, large studies, individuals who smoked marijuana on a daily
basis had a threefold risk of developing cirrhosis, even after controlling for other factors, such as
alcohol use and obesity. In addition, a biologically plausible mechanism exists for how marijuana use
could accelerate hepatic fibrosis. Whether other routes of marijuana ingestion or sporadic use have a
similar impact on liver fibrosis remains unknown.  Some patients use marijuana for nausea or chronic
pain, especially during peginterferon-based therapy.  Therefore, clinicians should inform all patients
                             2 / 10

of the potential hazards of smoking marijuana, but total abstinence should not be a requirement for
hepatitis C therapy.  For patients under consideration for a liver transplantation, many programs
require complete abstinence from marijuana. In this setting smoking marijuana may carry the risk of
pulmonary infection with fungal pathogens potentially contained in the marijuana. 
Diet and Modifying Obesity
Introduction: In the United States and other Western nations, obesity is a growing problem. The
average body mass index (BMI) for patients enrolled in hepatitis C therapy clinical trials frequently
exceeds 25, a level generally considered overweight.  Concurrent with the obesity epidemic, the
prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has risen substantially as has the more
severe form of NAFLD, known as non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).  The worldwide prevalence of
NAFLD and NASH are estimated at 6 to 33% and 3 to 5%, respectively. Even in the absence of
hepatitis C infection, NASH can cause cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease.
Modifying Obesity: In clinical trials of peginterferon and ribavirin, obesity and hepatic steatosis
consistently predicted a poorer response to therapy.  Fortunately, patients with obesity and hepatic
steatosis who receive treatment with directly acting antivirals have responses similar to non-obese
patients who receive the same therapy.  There are, however, concerns that patients successfully
treated for hepatitis C, but who have continued NAFLD or NASH, could develop further liver disease
and liver complications.  For this reason, any patient with a BMI greater than 30 should be referred to
a nutritionist for diet and weight loss counseling, with a goal of decreasing their BMI to less than 25. 
Obese patients should limit total caloric intake from fat to less than 30% (about 50 to 60 grams of fat
per day); avoiding fried foods is a good way to reduce excessive caloric intake from fat. Although
patients infrequently achieve their goal weight, they should receive counseling that any kind of
weight loss can benefit them, even if they lose as little as 3 to 5% of their baseline weight.  A
combination of exercise and diet often produces the best long-term results.
Diet: In general, patients with hepatitis C should choose nutritious foods from each food group:
fruits, vegetables, dairy, meat, and grains.  A well-balanced diet can help patients receive
appropriate amounts of all the vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients.  Because drug-food
interactions can occur, patients need to be aware of certain dietary restrictions if on therapy with
one of these agents.  Boceprevir, which is no longer recommended, can cause dysgeusia, but some
patients obtain relief from this metallic taste by refrigerating the boceprevir or using plastic utensils
when eating. All patients receiving therapy for hepatitis C should drink an abundant amount of water
(at least 3 liters per day) to prevent dehydration.
Coffee: Coffee consumption may provide a benefit to patients with chronic hepatitis C infection by
slowing fibrosis progression, decreasing the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma, and
increasing the rates of sustained virologic responses with therapy.  A large, NIH-sponsored study
(referred to as the HALT-C Trial) found that patients who consumed 3 or more cups of coffee per day
were half as likely to have progression of their liver disease and twice as likely to respond to
peginterferon and ribavirin therapy. Thus, patients should be advised that consuming 3 cups of
coffee per day may have a beneficial effect on their liver and chance of treatment response.
Sodium Intake: Patients with cirrhosis should limit sodium intake to less than 2 grams per day (88
mEq per day) because excessive sodium intake can lead to fluid retention in the form of lower
extremity edema and ascites. As a rough guide, one teaspoon of table salt contains about 2 grams of
sodium.  Patients should not add salt to their food, but instead should replace salt with herbs or
spices that can add flavor to the food, without the sodium load. Advise patients to choose fresh,
unprocessed foods instead of salted, smoked, cured, canned, or dried meats, since these processed
meats often contain large amounts of sodium.  
Protein Intake: Patients with chronic hepatitis C, especially those with cirrhosis, should consume
enough protein (at least 6 ounces per day for men and 4 to 5 ounces per day for women) to avoid
muscle wasting and to promote tissue healing.  Examples of high quality protein include chicken,
                             3 / 10

fish, lean beef, pork, tofu, nuts, beans, milk, yogurt, and eggs. 
Complementary and Alternative Medicines
Introduction: As many as 40% of patients with hepatitis C take complementary and alternative
medications. Some of these complementary and alternative medications, however, may have
harmful effects on the liver or cause serious interactions with medications used for hepatitis C
therapy. Accordingly, clinicians should obtain a complete list of complementary and alternative
medications taken by the patient (in addition to all prescription and over-the-counter medications) at
the initial visit and at regular intervals thereafter. For patients taking complementary or alternative
medications, clinicians should discuss whether it is wise for them to continue taking these alternative
and complementary medications.  The list of complementary and alternative medications should be
reviewed again during therapy for hepatitis C, as some patients may seek out these options for relief
of treatment-related side effects. The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine
(NCCAM) at the U.S. National Institutes of Health has an excellent website on the safety and efficacy
of alternative medications.
Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum): Milk thistle is the most frequently taken alternative medication by
patients with hepatitis C infection. It is produced from the seeds of a flowering herb and initial in
vitro and animal studies suggested the active compound in milk thistle (silymarin and its derivatives)
protected liver cells from injury and had antiviral activity. Investigation with an intravenous form of
silymarin in patients with chronic hepatitis C following liver transplantation showed promising
results, but a recent placebo-controlled, randomized study with high-dose oral silymarin found no
significant improvement in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or decreases in HCV RNA levels. Other
studies have produced inconsistent results. Oral milk thistle can be purchased in health food stores
without a prescription; the most frequently studied dose is 420 mg per day. The intravenous form of
silymarin is available only in a research setting. The most common side effects are gastrointestinal
(laxative effect, nausea, and epigastric discomfort). Milk thistle may also produce a hypoglycemic
effect, so patients with diabetes or hypoglycemia should take milk thistle with caution or avoid it
completely. Patients who have allergies to ragweed, chrysanthemum, marigold, or daisy may have a
similar reaction to milk thistle. Oral preparations of milk thistle do not appear to cause
hepatotoxicity, but it can decrease bilirubin conjugation and inhibit the cytochrome P450 enzyme
system, potentially causing jaundice and drug-drug interactions. In summary, milk thistle taken
orally does not appear to have any beneficial or toxic effects on the liver and it does not significantly
alter HCV RNA levels.  At this time, most experts recommend not initiating milk thistle for patients
with chronic hepatitis C. Patients who continue to take milk thistle should be warned about the
gastrointestinal and hypoglycemic side effects, and the potential for drug-drug interactions.
S-Adenosyl-L-Methionine (SAMe):  S-adenosyl-L-methionine (also called S-adenosyl methionine,
S-adenosylmethionine, SAMe, or SAM-e) is a molecule involved in multiple cellular reactions, acting
as the principal methyl donor.  Animal models have shown that SAMe depletion can enhance cellular
proliferation and growth, such as fibrosis and cancer. In vitro models of hepatitis C demonstrated
that SAMe enhances the antiviral effect of interferon, although SAMe does not have any direct
antiviral activity.  Patients with hepatitis C who took SAMe in conjunction with peginterferon and
ribavirin had improved viral kinetics (improved early response), but this did not translate into better
sustained virologic response rates. Most often, SAMe is taken at a dose of 1200 mg per day. There
are no large, high-quality studies to date demonstrating a treatment outcome benefit of taking SAMe
for patients with chronic hepatitis C. A meta-analysis of SAMe concluded that it is superior to placebo
in controlling pruritus in patients with chronic liver disease.
Licorice Root (Glycyrrhiza glabra): Licorice root contains a compound called glycyrrhizin (or
glycyrrhizic acid).  Although preliminary studies suggested intravenous glycyrrhizin had some
beneficial effects for patients with hepatitis C, the intravenous formulation is not available outside of
the research setting.  There are minimal reliable data on oral licorice root for hepatitis C, so no
specific recommendations can be made regarding its use.  When taken in large amounts, however,
licorice root containing glycyrrhizin can cause high blood pressure, salt and water retention, low
                             4 / 10

potassium levels, and alterations in serum cortisol levels.  For these reasons, it is not recommended
for patients on diuretics or those with cirrhosis or cardiovascular problems.
St John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum): The St. John’s wort plant (Hypericum perforatum), and
its derivative hypericin and hyperforin, are commonly used herbal medicines for the treatment of
depression.  The evidence for its effectiveness in depression is mixed, with several large studies
showing no benefit over placebo for major depression. St. John's wort does not have anti-HCV
activity, but it is a strong CYP3A inducer and thus can significantly lower the levels of HCV
medications that are substrates of CYP3A. Specifically, St. John's wort is contraindicated for use with
boceprevir, daclatasvir, ledipasvir-sofosbuvir, ombitasvir-paritaprevir-ritonavir, ombitasvir-
paritaprevir-ritonavir and dasabuvir, simeprevir, and sofosbuvir.  Essentially, any patient taking a
direct-acting antiviral agent (DAA) should not concomitantly take St. John’s wort.  Other significant
drug-drug interactions with St. John’s wort include digoxin, warfarin, oral contraceptives, and anti-
epileptics.
Thymus Extract: Produced from the thymus gland of cows, thymus extract is touted as an immune
system booster. One small study found no benefit in patients who had previously failed conventional
therapy. Overall, insufficient evidence exists to support its use in patients with chronic hepatitis C. In
addition, some have raised concerns of contamination of thymus extract products as well as the
potential for zoonotic disease transmission given its bovine source.
Ginseng: Ginseng is purported to benefit patients with hepatitis C by boosting the immune system. 
There are insufficient data with ginseng in patients with hepatitis C to make any recommendations
on its use. Importantly, it can lower blood glucose, so it should be used cautiously in patients with a
history of hypoglycemia or diabetes mellitus.
Schisandra (Magnolia Vine): Schisandra is a vine native to eastern Asia and is used an herbal
medicine. One small study suggested an antiviral effect, but larger confirmatory studies are needed
before routine use can be recommended.
Lactoferrin: Lactoferrin, also known as apolactoferrin or lactotransferrin, is a protein found in milk
and other body fluids that binds and transports iron.  The highest concentration of lactoferrin is in
colostrum. Bovine lactoferrin is the formulation of lactoferrin most often used when taken as a
dietary supplement, with a typical dose of 1.8 to 3.6 grams per day; lactoferrin can also be produced
via recombinant technology. In several small studies, lactoferrin lowered HCV RNA levels. At this
time, follow-up studies are required before any lactoferrin preparation can be recommended for
patients with hepatitis C, but lactoferrin appears to be safe.
Red Yeast Rice Extract: Red yeast rice extract is a dietary supplement commonly used in Asia to
lower blood cholesterol. It contains a compound (monacolin A) that is biochemically similar to HMG-
CoA-reductase inhibitors. Since these compounds can potentially interact with some of the HCV
DAAs, patients should be advised to not consume red yeast rice while on these hepatitis C treatment
medications.
Summary Points
Patients with chronic hepatitis C and no cirrhosis may take up to 2 grams per day of
acetaminophen.  Patients with cirrhosis should limit daily intake of acetaminophen to 1 gram
per day.  Those with excessive alcohol intake should not take acetaminophen.
In general, NSAIDS are safe for patients with hepatitis C, except for those with cirrhosis, in
which case they should be avoided or used sparingly.
Patients with a history of excessive alcohol use should quit alcohol completely and maintain a
period of sobriety for at least 6 months prior to consideration of antiviral therapy.  Patients
without a history of excessive alcohol may consume up to 1 alcoholic beverage a day (for
                             5 / 10

women) or 2 drinks per day (for men).
Obese patients are encouraged to lose at least 3 to 5% of their body weight, with a goal body
mass index of less than 25.
Patients can take a multivitamin without iron.  Vitamin D levels should be checked and
repleted if less than 20 ng/mL.
A balanced, low-fat (less than 30% of total calories) diet is recommended.  Patients with
cirrhosis should limit sodium intake to less than 2 grams per day and consume at least 6
ounces per day of protein. 
Drinking 3 or more cups of coffee per day may have beneficial effects for the liver and
increase the likelihood of antiviral response.
No complementary or alternative medications have shown a definite benefit for patients with
hepatitis C.  St. John’s wort should not be given to patients taking DAAs.  Ginseng can cause
hypoglycemia and licorice root can cause fluid retention and hypokalemia.
                             6 / 10

References
Adinolfi LE, Gambardella M, Andreana A, Tripodi MF, Utili R, Ruggiero G. Steatosis accelerates
the liver damage of chronic hepatitis C patients and correlates with specific genotypes and
visceral adiposity. Hepatology. 2001;33:1358-64.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Anstee QM, Day CP. S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) therapy in liver disease: A review of
current evidence and clinical utility. J Hepatol 2012; 57:1097-1109.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Bottiglieri T. S-Adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe): from the bench to the bedside--molecular
basis of a pleiotrophic molecule. Am J Clin Nutr. 2002;76:1151S-7S.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Bressler BL, Guindi M, Tomlinson G, Heathcote J. High body mass index Is an independent risk
factor for nonresponse to antiviral treatment in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology.
2003;38:639-44.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Bruggmann P, Dampz M, Gerlach T, Kravecz L, Falcato L. Treatment outcome in relation to
alcohol consumption during hepatitis C therapy: an analysis of the Swiss Hepatitis C Cohort
Study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2010;110:167-71.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Chalasani N, Younossi Z, Lavine JE, et al. The diagnosis and management of non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease: practice guideline by the American Gastroenterological Association,
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, and American College of
Gastroenterology. Gastroenterology. 2012;142:1592-609.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Dawson DA, Grant BF, Stinson FS, Zhou Y. Effectiveness of the derived Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT-C) in screening for alcohol use disorders and risk drinking in the US
general population. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2005;29:844-54.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
De Luca L, De Angelis C, Fagoonee S, Di Bella S, Rizzetto M, Pellicano R. Is smoking a
prognostic factor in patients with chronic hepatitis C? Minerva Gastroeterol Dietol 2009;
55:139-43.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Eslam M, Aparcero R, Kawaguchi T, Del Campo JA, Sata M, Khattab MA, Romero-Gomez M.
Meta-analysis: insulin resistance and sustained virological response in hepatitis C. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. 2011;34:297-305.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Feld JJ, Modi AA, El-Diwany R, et al. S-adenosyl methionine improves early viral responses and
interferon-stimulated gene induction in hepatitis C nonresponders. Gastroenterology.
2011;140:830-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Filipowicz M, Bernsmeier C, Terracciano L, Duong FH, Heim MH. S-adenosyl-methionine and
betaine improve early virological response in chronic hepatitis C patients with previous
nonresponse. PLoS One. 2010;5:e15492.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
                             7 / 10

Fiore C, Eisenhut M, Krausse R, Ragazzi E, Pellati D, Armanini D, Bielenberg J. Antiviral effects
of Glycyrrhiza species. Phytother Res. 2008;22:141-8.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Freedman ND, Curto TM, Lindsay KL, Wright EC, Sinha R, Everhart JE; HALT-C TRIAL GROUP.
Coffee consumption is associated with response to peginterferon and ribavirin therapy in
patients with chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2011;140:1961-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Freedman ND, Everhart JE, Lindsay KL, et al. Coffee intake is associated with lower rates of
liver disease progression in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2009;50:1360-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Fried MW, Navarro VJ, Afdhal N, et al. Effect of silymarin (milk thistle) on liver disease in
patients with chronic hepatitis C unsuccessfully treated with interferon therapy: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;308:274-82.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Fried MW, Shiffman ML, Reddy KR, et al. Peginterferon alfa-2a plus ribavirin for chronic
hepatitis C virus infection. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:975-82.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Hézode C, Lonjon I, Roudot-Thoraval F, Mavier JP, Pawlotsky JM, Zafrani ES, Dhumeaux D.
Impact of smoking on histological liver lesions in chronic hepatitis C. Gut. 2003;52:126-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Hézode C, Lonjon I, Roudot-Thoraval F, Pawlotsky JM, Zafrani ES, Dhumeaux D. Impact of
moderate alcohol consumption on histological activity and fibrosis in patients with chronic
hepatitis C, and specific influence of steatosis: a prospective study.Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2003;17:1031-7.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Hézode C, Roudot-Thoraval F, Nguyen S, et al. Daily cannabis smoking as a risk factor for
progression of fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2005;42:63-71.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Hézode C, Zafrani ES, Roudot-Thoraval F, et al. Daily cannabis use: a novel risk factor of
steatosis severity in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology. 2008;134(2):432-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Hypericum Depression Trial Study Group. Effect of Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort) in
major depressive disorder: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;287:1807-14.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Ishibashi Y, Takeda K, Tsukidate N, Miyazaki H, Ohira K, Dosaka-Akita H, Nishimura M.
Randomized placebo-controlled trial of interferon alpha-2b plus ribavirin with and without
lactoferrin for chronic hepatitis C. Hepatol Res. 2005;32:218-23.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Ishida JH, Peters MG, Jin C, Louie K, Tan V, Bacchetti P, Terrault NA. Influence of cannabis use
on severity of hepatitis C disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;6:69-75.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Jacobson JM, Feinman L, Liebes L, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and antiviral effects of
                             8 / 10

hypericin, a derivative of St. John's wort plant, in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus
infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001;45:517-24.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Khandelwal N, James LP, Sanders C, Larson AM, Lee WM; Acute Liver Failure Study Group.
Unrecognized acetaminophen toxicity as a cause of indeterminate acute liver failure.
Hepatology. 2011;53:567-76.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Kitson MT, Dore GJ, George J, et al. Vitamin D status does not predict sustained virologic
response or fibrosis stage in chronic hepatitis C genotype 1 infection. J Hepatol.
2013;58:467-72.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Larson AM, Polson J, Fontana RJ, Davern TJ, Lalani E, Hynan LS, Reisch JS, Schiødt FV,
Ostapowicz G, Shakil AO, Lee WM; Acute Liver Failure Study Group. Acetaminophen-induced
acute liver failure: results of a United States multicenter, prospective study. Hepatology.
2005; 42:1364-72.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Lawvere S, Mahoney MC. St. John's wort. Am Fam Physician. 2005;72:2249-54.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Marrero JA, Fontana RJ, Fu S, Conjeevaram HS, Su GL, Lok AS. Alcohol, tobacco and obesity
are synergistic risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2005; 42:218-24.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Martineau AR. Vitamin D: An adjunct to antiretroviral therapy? J Infect Dis. 2013;207:373-5.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
McMahon BJ, Bruden D, Bruce MG, et al. Adverse outcomes in Alaska Natives who recovered
from or have chronic hepatitis C infection. Gastroenterology. 2010;138:922-31.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Monto A, Patel K, Bostrom A, Pianko S, Pockros P, McHutchison JG, Wright TL.Risks of a range
of alcohol intake on hepatitis C-related fibrosis. Hepatology. 2004;39(3):826-34.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Myers RP, Shaheen AA. Hepatitis C, alcohol abuse, and unintentional overdoses are risk
factors for acetaminophen-related hepatotoxicity. Hepatology. 2009;49:1399-400.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Nguyen GC, Sam J, Thuluvath PJ. Hepatitis C is a predictor of acute liver injury among
hospitalizations for acetaminophen overdose in the United States: a nationwide analysis.
Hepatology. 2008;48:1336-41.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Pattullo V, Duarte-Rojo A, Soliman W, V, et al. A 24-week dietary and physical activity lifestyle
intervention reduces hepatic insulin resistance in the obese with chronic hepatitis C. Liver Int.
2013;33:410-9.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Pekow JR, Bhan AK, Zheng H, Chung RT. Hepatic steatosis is associated with increased
frequency of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with hepatitis C-related cirrhosis. Cancer.
2007;109:2490-6.
                             9 / 10

[PubMed Abstract] - 
Petta S, Cammà C, Scazzone C, et al. Low vitamin D serum level is related to severe fibrosis
and low responsiveness to interferon-based therapy in genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C.
Hepatology. 2010;51:1158-67.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Polyak S, Ferenci P, Pawlotsky JM. Hepatoprotective and antiviral functions of silymarin
components in hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology. 2013;57:1262-71.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Poynard T, Bedossa P, Opolon P. Lancet. Natural history of liver fibrosis progression in
patients with chronic hepatitis C. The OBSVIRC, METAVIR, CLINIVIR, and DOSVIRC groups.
Lancet. 1997;349:825-32.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Riley TR 3rd, Smith JP. Ibuprofen-induced hepatotoxicity in patients with chronic hepatitis C: a
case series. Am J Gastroenterol. 1998;93:1563-5.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Seeff LB, Curto TM, Szabo G, et al. Herbal product use by persons enrolled in the hepatitis C
Antiviral Long-Term Treatment Against Cirrhosis (HALT-C) Trial. Hepatology. 2008;47:605-12.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Seeff LB. Herbal hepatotoxicity. Clin Liver Dis. 2007;11:577-96, vii.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Stokes CS, Volmer DA, Grünhage F, Lammert F. Vitamin D in chronic liver disease. Liver Int.
2013; 33:338-52.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco JH, Henley SJ, Heath CW Jr, Doll R. Alcohol consumption
and mortality among middle-aged and elderly U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:1705-14.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Watkins PB, Kaplowitz N, Slattery JT, Colonese CR, Colucci SV, Stewart PW, Harris SC.
Aminotransferase elevations in healthy adults receiving 4 grams of acetaminophen daily: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2006; 296:87-93.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Zein CO. Clearing the smoke in chronic liver diseases. Hepatology. 2010;51:1487-90.
[PubMed Abstract] - 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
                            10 / 10
