Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=bfsn20
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition
ISSN: 1040-8398 (Print) 1549-7852 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/bfsn20
An outlook on the role of decaffeinated coffee in
neurodegenerative diseases
Raffaella Colombo & Adele Papetti
To cite this article: Raffaella Colombo & Adele Papetti (2019): An outlook on the role of
decaffeinated coffee in neurodegenerative diseases, Critical Reviews in Food Science and
Nutrition, DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2018.1550384
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1550384
Published online: 07 Jan 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
View Crossmark data

REVIEW
An outlook on the role of decaffeinated coffee in neurodegenerative diseases
Raffaella Colombo
and Adele Papetti
Department of Drug Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
ABSTRACT
Coffee is reported to be among the most widely consumed beverages in the world and coffee
consumption has been associated with reductions in the risk of several chronic diseases. Among
its constituents, caffeine represents the most investigated component. The main impact of caffeine
on health is associated with the central nervous system, the cardiovascular system, the inflamma-
tory mechanisms, the metabolism of carbohydrates, and the cancer. Current research is devoted
to the role of this compound and its analogs or derivatives on neuroinflammation and neurodege-
nerative disorders, mainly Alzheimer’s Disease and Parkinson’s Disease. However, coffee is also rich
in polyphenols, mainly phenolic acids (chlorogenic acids, caffeic acid, ferulic acid), quinic acid, and
quercetin. Many aspects still require greater clarification, including the effect of coffee compounds
different from caffeine, on several pathologies. This review aimed to provide a comprehensive
overview of the potential benefits of decaffeinated coffee constituents, focusing the attention on
neurological processes and pathologies, such as mainly memories disorders, Parkinson’s Disease,
neurophatic pain disorders, and cerebral ischemia.
KEYWORDS
Coffee; decaffeinated coffee;
non-caffeine compounds;
health; neurological disorders
Introduction
Coffee is the second-most popular consumed beverage, after
tea, with a global export from the producing countries of ca.
seven millions tons per year (FAO 2018) and a worldwide
consume of ca.2.3 billion cups per day (Deshpande et al.
2014). Coffee beverage is prepared from the roasted seeds
(or beans) of the genus Coffea, including the two most fam-
ous species C. arabica L. and C. robusta L. Linden (also
known as C. canephora), after a dried process of the mature
berries containing the seeds. Coffea species grow in the
Equatorial regions at an altitude of 200–1600 m, at 18–22 C.
Arabica coffee represents about 70% of the world market
and, in particular if produced in Central America, generally
possesses superior organoleptic properties and therefore is
more expensive, but more appreciated, than Robusta which
occasionally could be characterized by a pronounced and
strong bitterness (Bertrand et al. 2003; Mancha Agresti
et al. 2008).
Coffee brew is an important source of bioactive com-
pounds, i.e. polyphenols, melanoidins, and other Maillard
Reaction Products (MRPs) induced by the roasting process,
and therefore it is a very complex mixture of compounds;
moreover, its composition highly depends on variety, degree
of roasting, and processing. All these bioactive compounds
have important effects on different organs and systems with
potential activity mainly in diabetes, cardiovascular, gastro-
intestinal, liver, and neurodegenerative disorders, and cancer
(Cano-Marquina, Tarın, and Cano 2013; G€okcen and S¸anlier
2017). Focusing the attention on central nervous system
(CNS) and neurological processes, the positive effect of cof-
fee intake (daily consumption of 2 cups, i.e. a plasma caf-
feine levels of 20–40 mmol/L) is mainly associated with a
lowest risk of age-related cognitive disorders, i.e. cognitive
dysfunction, mind cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia,
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD),
which highly impact on global health society (Santos et al.
2010; Cano-Marquina, Tarın, and Cano 2013; Liu et al.
2016b; Wierzejska 2017; Wu, Sun, and He 2017).
It is also known that a short-term protective association
occurs between coffee and incident of dementia, and some
studies have underlined that the positive effect regards only
cognitive performance and not memory function (Mirza
et al. 2014; Araujo et al. 2016). In addition, a real associ-
ation between coffee consumption and MCI progression to
dementia still need to be clarified (Panza et al. 2015).
Coffee impact on health also regards other disorders
associated with CNS, such as cerebral ischemia and trau-
matic brain injury (TBI), autoimmune diseases (rheumatoid
arthritis, RA; multiple sclerosis, MS; systemic lupus erythe-
matosus,
SLE;
amyothrophic
lateral
sclerosis,
ALS)
(Hedstr€om et al. 2016; Sharif et al. 2017; Stephenson et al.
2018), and depression (Hall et al. 2015; Grosso et al. 2016).
Caffeine (CF, a methylated xanthine) represents the most
investigated component in coffee and in literature many
works have been focused on its action against mainly MCI,
dementia, AD, PD (Arendash and Cao 2010; Cao et al.
2012; Flaten et al. 2014; Xu et al. 2016a; Kolahdouzan and
Hamadeh 2017), and recently prion diseases, also known as
CONTACT Adele Papetti
adele.papetti@unipv.it
Department of Drug Sciences, University of Pavia, V.le Taramelli 12, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/bfsn.
 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1550384

transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) (Moon
et al. 2014). In fact, over years many caffeine analogs have
been studied as antagonists of adenosine receptors, or inhib-
itors of phosphodiesterase and monoamine (MAO)B or
cytoprotective agents, for potential therapeutic application,
mainly in AD and PD (Kalda et al. 2006; Van der Walt
et al. 2013; Jasiewicz et al. 2016).
Nowadays, it is well known that the impact of coffee on
health and its neuroprotective effect is not due to CF alone,
but to other bioactive coffee components, which are inde-
pendently able to improve motor and cognitive performan-
ces in aging and in depression (Cano-Marquina, Tarın, and
Cano 2013; Shukitt-Hale et al. 2013; Hall et al. 2015;
Szwajgier, Borowiec, and Pustelniak 2017).
In this review, we decided to focus our attention on non-
caffeine compounds, such as phenolic acids, mainly chloro-
genic acid (CGA), caffeic acid (CA), ferulic acid (FA), and
their derivatives; quinic acid (QA), quercetin and eicosa-
noyl-5-hydroxytryptamide
(EHT)
(Figure
1),
presenting
the collected data for each specific neurological effect, and
discussing them in comparison with CF.
Coffee and decaffeinated coffee composition
Green coffee beans contain sugars, amino acids, lipids, metals,
purine alkaloids, carotenoids, terpenoids, and a high number
of secondary metabolites, mainly esters of trans-cinnamic
acids
and
quinic
acid
(CGAs),
hydroxycinnamic
acids
Figure 1. Chemical structures of decaffeinated coffee components discussed in the present review.
2
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

conjugated with amino acids or glycosides, CA, FA, and
dimethoxycinnamic acids (Alonso-Salces et al. 2009; Patay,
Bencsik, and Papp 2016).
The methylxanthine and polyphenol profiles are affected
by coffee variety and cultivar, pedo-climatic conditions (alti-
tude, soil, fertilization, sun exposure, temperature, rainfall),
harvesting,
and
post-
harvest
conditions
(fermentation,
washing, drying, and storage) (Alonso-Salces et al. 2009;
Mullen et al. 2013; Jeszka-Skowron, Stanisz, and Paz De
Pe~na 2016). For example, caffeine levels in C. robusta are
about twice as much as C. arabica (Ludwig et al. 2014), and
CGAs concentration is inversely correlated with the quality
of coffee. This explains the taste differences between Arabica
and Robusta beans, closely related to the bitterness of coffee
beverage (Ky et al. 2001; Farah et al. 2006b; Jeszka-Skowron,
Stanisz, and Paz De Pe~na 2016). Another key factor influ-
encing the chemical composition and therefore the bioactiv-
ity of coffee is the roasting process: in fact, some natural
polyphenols may be lost, while other compounds may form,
such as melanoidins and some volatile heterocyclic com-
pounds
(for
example
hydroxymethylfurfural,
HMF)
(Somporn
et
al.
2011;
Wang,
Qian,
and
Yao
2011).
Depending on time and temperature applied during roasting
process, coffee is usually classified as light, medium, and
dark roasted. At all degree of roasting, Robusta coffee has
lower level of trigonelline, CGAs, furfural, and HMF than
Arabica; on the contrary, higher concentration of CF is pre-
sent in Robusta. Caffeine is relatively stable during roasting
and therefore its level does not change depending on the
degree of roasting, differently from trigonelline. Considering
CGAs,
their
total
concentration
generally
decreases
(Hecimovic et al. 2011; Kamiyama et al. 2015; Liang et al.
2016) following first-order reaction kinetics (Perrone et al.
2010), even if dicaffeoylquinic acids (di-CQAs) are the most
sensible to this process (Kucera et al. 2016), while mono-
CQA and monoferuloylquinic acids (mono-FQAs) level
increased with roasting (Bicho et al. 2011). In the early stage
of the roasting process, acyl migration or hydrolysis of the
ester bond may take place, easily originating 1-acyl deriva-
tives, not present in green coffee beans; during the later
stage, roasting may also induce the generation of chloro-
genic lactones from the epimerization and lactonization of
the quinic mojety (Farah et al. 2006a; Jaiswal et al. 2012;
Deshpande et al. 2014). Considering as the above men-
tioned, CF/CGAs (3-CQA þ 4-CQA þ 5-CQA) is generally
used as a marker of the degree of roasting. Roasting process
also affects macronutrients leading to a change in saccha-
rides and proteins that undergo to Maillard reaction, thus
generating melanoidins (Ludwig et al. 2014).
Different procedures of coffee preparation affect the com-
position in CGAs and CF. In particular, brewed coffee have
a higher concentration of these compounds than expresso
coffee probably due to the longer contact time of water with
coffee powder in the filter coffeemaker and the higher final
volume. Moreover, the technical characteristics of espresso
coffee machines (different high water pressure and time)
may
influence
the
recovery
of
bioactive
compounds
(Caprioli et al. 2015), and also the different grade of roasted
beans used in the different countries may lead to CF/CGAs
ratio ranging from 0.7 to 11 (Ludwig et al. 2014).
Conversely, the processing used to obtain instant coffee
(freeze or spry-drying) does not significantly affect the level
of CGAs, especially in the case of dark roasted coffee
(Vignoli, Bassoli, and Benassi 2011), and when compared to
fresh coffee differences of less than 1 mg/100 mL have been
registered (Mills et al. 2013).
Considering decaffeinated coffee, some reports indicated
a consistent loss of CGAs (Farah et al. 2005) while others
reported only a not significant reduction (Azevedo et al.
2008; Mills et al. 2013; Jeszka-Skowron, Stanisz, and Paz De
Pe~na 2016; 2016; Lopez-Froilan et al. 2016); these differences
may be attributed to the commercial methods used for
extracting CF from coffee.
Green coffee beans also contain organic acids as well as
roasted coffee, i.e. malic, acetic, quinic, pyroglutammic, suc-
cinic, and fumaric acids. A great variability in their concen-
tration has reported, depending on the kind of coffee bean,
the roasting degree, and the processing applied, but gener-
ally no significant differences were registered between regu-
lar and decaffeinated coffee (Alcazar et al. 2003; Lopez-
Froilan et al. 2016).
Melanoidins are a consistent component of roasted coffee
beans and their amount in coffee beverages depend on the
type of coffee preparation being higher in soluble coffee
(about 23 g/100 g) than filtered, moka, and expresso coffee
(about 7 g/100 g of coffee) (Fogliano and Morales 2011;
Tagliazucchi and Bellesia 2015). The concentration range of
melanoidin intake by coffee consumption is 0.5–2 g per day
(Fogliano and Morales 2011).
Non-caffeine main compounds in coffee that may
affect nervous system
According to Clifford (Clifford et al. 2017) 72 acyl-quinic
acids are present in green coffee beans among which 5-CQA
is the main component followed by diCQAs, triCQAs,
FQAs, diferuloylquinic acids (diFQA), p-coumaroylquinic
acids
(pCoQAs),
di-p-coumaroylquinic
acids
(di-CQAs),
dimethoxycinnamoylquinic
acid
(DQA),
feruloylcaffeoyl-
quinic
acids
(FCQA),
dimethoxycinnamoylcaffeoylquinic
acid
(DCQA),
dimethoxycinnamoylferuloylquinic
acid
(DFQA), p-coumaroylcaffeoylquinic acids (pCoCQA), p-cou-
maroylferuloylquinic acids, and p-coumaroyldimethoxycin-
namoylquinic acids. Roasting process can result in loss of
about 90% and in a deep transformation so that the number
of acyl-derivatives is about 200. In coffee beverages, CQAs,
di-CQAs, and FQAs are quantitatively the main representa-
tive (Clifford 1985) and despite the loss occurring during
roasting process, coffee is one of the richest dietary source
of CGAs delivering 24–423 mg per serving, depending on
the type of coffee beans and the type of preparation
(Crozier et al. 2012; Mills et al. 2013; Ludwig et al. 2014).
The amount of caffeine ingested per serving is ranging from
51 to 322 mg (Crozier et al. 2012).
The catabolic fate of coffee CGAs in humans is scarce
and contradictory. More recently, an extensive metabolism
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
3

was pointed out; in fact, free and sulfated conjugates of
dihydroferulic acid and dihydrocaffeic acid were detected in
highest levels in plasma with Tmax values of 4.7–5.2 h, indi-
cating absorption in the large intestine. Conversely, 5-CQA,
caffeoylquinic lactones-O-sulfates, and FQAs seemed to be
absorbed in small intestine as evident from Tmax values of
0.6–1.0 h (Stalmach et al. 2009; Del Rio et al. 2010). The
cleavage of the ester bonds between quinic mojety and
hydroxycinnamic residues seems to occur in the small intes-
tine as well as the metabolic transformation of caffeic and
ferulic acids in the corresponding O-sulfates or methylate
derivatives. Ferulic and caffeic acids are preferentially con-
verted to dihydro derivatives in the colon (Del Rio et al.
2010). The increased levels of QA after digestion could have
healthy properties as QA may act as an antioxidant through
the metabolism of tryptophan and nicotinamide (Pero,
Lund, and Leanderson 2009; Lopez-Froilan 2016).
Quercetin, a commonly consumed flavonol, is another
non-caffeine compound active in neurodegenerative disor-
ders; its metabolism is quite well understood; in fact, it is
well adsorbed at the small intestine level differently from
stomach level where only a small quantity is adsorbed. Then
quercetin is directly metabolized or in part before catabol-
ized by gut microflora and only the resulting products
absorbed and metabolized. The resulting metabolites, i.e.
methyl, sulfate, and glucuronide conjugates, circulate in the
blood stream and then excreted with urine (Del Rio et al.
2013; Almeida et al. 2018). Notably, a higher inter-individual
variation in the catabolites deriving from microbiota action
than in the small intestine metabolites was recorded, even if
it is difficult to establish the factors affecting these variations
(Almeida et al. 2018).
Melanoidins are generally considered poorly adsorbed
and therefore poorly bioavailable even if the low molecular
weight water-soluble fraction seems be partially adsorbed in
the intestinal tract (Tagliazucchi and Bellesia 2015). Protein-
bound melanoidin fraction has to be released by proteases
in the gastro-intestinal tract before absorption and therefore
the form free or protein-bound in which they are present in
coffee highly influence the bioavailability. Only about 30%
of low molecular weight melanoidins is estimated to be
absorbed; conversely, the quite total amount of high molecu-
lar weight melanoidins are excreted in feces (Delgado-
Andrade et al. 2012; Hellwig et al. 2014).
The compounds will be discussed below in accordance
with their different neurological effect in comparison to caf-
feine activity and in relation to different neurodegenera-
tive disorders.
Neurological effects of non-caffeine compounds in
comparison with caffeine
Neuroprotection and antioxidant activity
The oxidative stress and the resulting neurodegeneration are
involved in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
Caffeine affects all adenosine receptors, but it has the high-
est interaction with adenosine A1 and A2A receptors (A1R
and A2AR). In particular, CF neuroprotective effect mainly
involves A2AR, probably acting as an A2AR antagonist or
inverse agonist, as clarified on models for PD and AD
(Kalda et al. 2006; Fernandez-Due~nas et al. 2014; Xu et al.
2016a; Flaten et al. 2014; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017).
A2AR are present in striatal and cortical neurons, astrocytes,
microglia and oligodendrocytes and are related to neuroin-
flammation. A2AR are involved in multiple oxidative path-
ways,
associated
with
N-Methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA),
glutamate
(Glu),
cyclic
adenosine
30,50-monophosphate
(cAMP),
and
extracellular-signal-regulated
kinase
(ERK)
(Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). Therefore, they are asso-
ciated with many neuronal pathological processes from AD
and PD to Huntington’s disease (HD), cerebral ischemia,
and TBI (Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017; Kulbe and Hall
2017). TBI is also correlated to cognitive, behavioral, and
possible motor dysfunctions of a neurodegenerative tauop-
athy, named as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)
(Kulbe and Hall 2017). Also semi-chronic treatment with
CF (i.e. 2 weeks in mouse models of AD) seem to stimulate
protein
kinase
A
(PKA)
signiling
and
phospho-CREB
expression in the striatum. In addition, CF downregulates
the expression of the pro-apoptotic phospho-JNK and phos-
pho-ERK in the striatum and cortex, inhibiting pro-apop-
totic
pathways
and
promoting
sinaptic
plasticity
and
neuronal protection/survival (Zeitlin et al. 2011). In particu-
lar, CF anti-apoptotic and neuroprotective effect is a result
of an activation of phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase (PI3K)/
protein kinase B (PKB or Akt) system, one of the major sig-
naling pathway (Nakaso, Ito, and Nakashima 2008; Kang
et al. 2012; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). In addition,
CF seems to directly interact with Glu release and in par-
ticular with Glu receptor gene GRIN2A, which encodes an
NMDA-Glu-receptor unit, responsible for excitatory neuro-
transmission. GRIN2A is associated with HD, schizofrenia,
rare
neurodevelopmental
disorders
(Kolahdouzan
and
Hamadeh 2017) and also PD (Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh
2017; Hamza et al. 2011; Simon et al. 2017). The involvment
of A2AR and CF activity in ALS is not yet clear. Some
authors have presented case-control studies which show a
potential protective role of CF against ALS risk (Beghi et al
2011; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). Other studies did
not find an association between coffee/CF intake and ALS
(Fondell et al. 2015).
The effect of CF in HD remains controversial, in fact an
habitual CF intake (>190 mg/day i.e. > 2 cups/day) could be
associated with a risk of early-onset HD, probably because
of a potential contribution of A1R modulation, also involved
in neuropathic pain, but additional investigations are still
required
(Simonin
et
al.
2013;
Martins
et
al.
2015;
Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). The potential role of CF
in
HD,
which
is
a
polyglutamine-related
disorder
as
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), opens interesting investiga-
tions on this type of ataxia. MJD includes motor dysfunc-
tions, postural instability and parkinsonism and nowadays,
only few studies demonstrate a potential role of CF in A2AR
inactivation against the Glu overstimulation of this ataxia
(Gonc¸alves et al. 2013; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017).
Today, little is also known on CF effect in TSEs, which are
4
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

fatal neurodegenerative disorders, caused by the misfolding
of normal cellular prion into an abnormal species. Some evi-
dences have shown that the neuroprotective effect of CF is
caused by a prevention of prion-mediated neurotoxicity,
enhancing autophagy and protecting cells against prion-
induced apoptosis, thanks to Akt activation and JNK inhib-
ition, but additional studies are necessary (Moon et al.
2014). Coffee/CF effect in PD is very controversial, many
case-control studies have reported a positive effect, others
did not find any association. Caffeine’s protective effects in
PD may be due to adenosine antagonism (Wirdefeldt et al.
2011; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). From many years,
it is well known that caffeinated coffee consumption exhibits
a neuroprotective effect with a reduced mortality only in
men with PD, but not in all women, since in postmeno-
pausal women in estrogenic therapy, estrogens become com-
petitive inhibitors of CF metabolism. In fact, CF and
estrogens are metabolized by CYP1A2 enzyme (Ascherio
et al. 2003; Wirdefeldt et al. 2011; Palacios et al. 2012; Kim
et al. 2017; Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh 2017). CF neuropro-
tective effect and antioxidant capacity make it one of the
most used and studied drug for premature human neonates
with
immature
brain
and
hyperoxia-induced
injury
(Endesfelder
et
al.
2014;
Endesfelder
et
al.
2017).
Nevertheless the complete positive effect of this treatment
requires additional investigations, as its action on fetal brain
development is not yet clear (Silva et al. 2013; Endesfelder
et al. 2017; Fazeli et al. 2017). In fact, studies on CF con-
sumption during pregnancy and first postnatal period have
shown GABAergic circuit alteration, hippocampal hyper-
activity, cognitive deficit, and memory dysfunction (Silva
et al. 2013; Fazeli et al. 2017).
Coffee/CF neuroprotective effect in association with MS
remains unclear. MS is a chronic demyelinating disease of
CNS, which involves sensory, motor and cognitive capaci-
ties. Some studies did not find any significative relationship
between coffee intake and MS risk (Massa et al. 2013;
Hedstr€om et al. 2016). Other studies on case-controls have
shown that an high coffee consumption is associated with a
decrease in MS risk, and some MS animal models have con-
firmed that this is probably due to CF neuroprotective and
anti-inflammatory properties (Hedstr€om et al. 2016; Sharif
et al. 2017). These opposite results have to be clarified also
in relation to a potential positive effect of coffee only in
relapsing onset MS, but not in progressive onset MS. This
could also hypothesize a different mechanism in relapsing
onset (focal inflammatory lesions and axonal injury), in
comparison with progressive one (diffuse axonal degener-
ation) (D’hooghe et al. 2012). In the case of another chronic
autoimmune disorder such as SLE, which can involve also
the CNS, coffee intake seems to be marginally or not associ-
ated with the disease progression, but in literature only few
studies are present (Kiyohara et al. 2014; Sharif et al. 2017).
In spite of the many studies on CF, it is also well known
that coffee neuroprotection on cognitive and psychomotor
performances in aging is not due to CF alone, but it is prob-
ably caused by a synergistic effect with coffee phenolic phy-
tochemicals (Shukitt-Hale et al. 2013). In fact, some studies
have shown that caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee (DCC)
have
a
similar
neuroprotective
effect
against
Reactive
Oxygen Species (ROS) (Figure 2A) (Kim et al. 2012).
Experiments on transgenic C. elegans, which is a model of
AD and amyloid beta (Ab) peptides toxicity (see also Anti-
amyloid activity) showed that coffee neuroprotective effects
are due mainly to other coffee components rather than CF
or to a synergistic effect with CF. In fact, DCC can inhibit
C. elegans paralysis induced by Ab peptides with only a
slightly weaker effect than caffeinated coffee. This action
does not seem to be related with a direct effect on Ab
deposits, but with SKIN-1/Nrf2 system and oxidative stress
pathways (Dostal, Roberts, and Link 2010). In fact, the effect
of DCC in neuroprotection against AD and PD is associated
with the cytoprotective transcription factor Nrf2 (Dostal,
Roberts, and Link 2010; Trinh et al. 2010). Nrf2 pathway
has become an attractive target for the prevention and treat-
ment of oxidative stress-related neurodegenerative diseases
and coffee can represent an important Nrf2 modulator,
through different mechanisms, such as amyloidogenic pro-
cess and protein tau-signaling pathway (Vicente, Ishimoto,
and Torres 2014; Zhang et al. 2015).
The neuroprotective effect of CGA (i.e. 5-CQA) and its
metabolites, such as CA, FA, isoferulic or vanillic acids, and
QA is well known to be mainly due to their antioxidant
properties (Gomez-Ruiz, Leake, and Ames 2007; Kwon et al.
Figure 2. A comparison of regular coffee (RC), decaffeinated coffee (DCC) and
CGA neuroprotective effect against apoptosis in primary neuronal cultures,
measured by the nuclear condensation assay (number of condensed nuclei per
total nuclei). Cells were pretreated with (A) RC (or DCC) at 50 μg/ml or (B)
50 lM CGA for 1 h, followed by 50 lM H2O2 for 24 h. RC and DCC similarly
inhibit H2O2-induced apoptosis and this effect appears to be totally due to CGA
(Kim et al. 2012).
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
5

2010; Kim et al. 2012), while, according recent studies, the
antioxidant
activity
of
CF
needs
further
investigations
(Yoshimura et al. 2016). In addition, the neuroprotective
effect of DCC seems to be totally caused by CGA (Figure
2A–B) (Kim et al. 2012). Among CGA metabolites, CA rep-
resents the most neuroprotective phenolic acid, displaying a
broad neuroprotective profile against oxidative and nitrosa-
tive stress, excitotoxicity, intrinsic apoptosis, endoplasmatic-
reticulum (ER) stress, and proteasome inhibition (Figure
3A–C)
(Deshmukh
et
al.
2016;
Taram,
Winter,
and
Linseman 2016). CA has potent neuroprotective and antioxi-
dant properties, with potential applications in dementia dis-
orders. CA restors levels of the glutathione (GSH) enzyme,
enhances
brain
Achethylcoline
(ACh)
level,
decreases
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity (see section Anti-acetyl-
cholinesterase activity), and improves non-spatial and spatial
memory performance, without affecting locomotor activity
(Deshmukh et al. 2016). In addition, CA antioxidant (inhib-
ition of lipid peroxidation) and anti-inflammatory (inhib-
ition of NO production) properties cause neuroprotection
and improvement of memory deficit, caused by Ab peptides
(Kim et al. 2015). In fact, CA neuroprotective and antioxi-
dant effects could be mediated by its anti-aggregating activ-
ity against Ab peptides, as mentioned in section Anti-
amyloid activity (Kim et al. 2015; Arai et al. 2016).
Multifunctional tacrine-CA compounds represent AD prom-
ising agents, which can protect neurons against Glu-induced
injury and attenuate mitochondrial damage, interfering with
Nrf2 pathway (Chao et al. 2014). In addition, CA and its
derivative caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), exhibit an
important neuroprotective effect, acting on acrolein-induced
oxidative stress, which is implicated in the etiology of neu-
rodegenerative disorders, such as AD and PD (Huang et al.
2013; Taram, Winter, and Linseman 2016). Acrolein also
directly promoted Ab aggregation and protein-tau hyper-
phosphorilation implicated in AD. CA and CAPE act on sig-
naling
mechanisms
with
a
positive
effect
on
acrolein
neurotoxicity,
ROS
accumulation,
and
GSH
depletion
(Huang et al. 2013).
CGA exhibits a pro-oxidant activity at high concentra-
tions, i.e. 100–200 mg/mL (280–560 lM) (Kamiyama et al.
2015), and a moderate anti-oxidant effect at low concentra-
tion, i.e. 5 mg/mL (14 mM) (Kamiyama et al. 2015) or at
50 lM (Kim et al. 2012). At low concentration, this molecule
exhibits an effect against H2O2-induced neuronal cell (PC-
12) death, intracellular accumulation of ROS, and mitochon-
drial dysfunctions, as clarified in studies on instant DCC,
rich in CGA (Cho et al. 2009; Kim et al. 2012; Park 2013)
(Figure 2B). In relation to H2O2-induced ROS and malon-
dialdehyde (MDA) accumulation, CGA exhibit a potent
action, as evident from ex-vivo and in vitro experiments
(Kwon et al. 2010; Gul et al. 2016). Some tests in rat cortical
slices have shown that CGA can exhibit a protective role of
hundred and seven times higher than resveratrol, against
ROS and MDA, respectively (Gul et al. 2016). In addition,
CGA interacts with caspase-3, inhibits the H2O2-induced
down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins and induces the
expression
of NADPH:quinine
oxidoreductase 1,
which
belongs to the family of oxidoreductases (Kim et al. 2012).
The mechanisms involved in the neuroprotective effects of
CGA are complex and have not yet been clearly established.
Different radical-scavenging mechanisms are possible and
despite its antioxidant effects, CGA may protect neurons
inhibiting apoptotic processes or acting against Glu neuro-
toxicity with important beneficials in ischemic brain injury
and stroke (Mikami and Yamazawa 2015; Park 2013). In
addition, CGA, 3-CQA and 4-CQA inhibit the H2O2-
induced apoptosis, suppressing mitochondrial membrane
depolarization and the apoptosis pathway, involving caspase-
Figure 3. A comparison of CGA, CA, FA, and QA neuroprotective effect from (A)
oxidative stress or (B) nitrosative stress or (C) glutamate excitotoxicity on cere-
bellar granule neurons (CGNs), measured by MTT cell viability assay. CGNs were
pre-incubated in serum-free culture medium with 10 lM CGA and QA or 50 lM
CA and FA for 24 h and then exposed to (A) 50 lM H2O2 or (B) 50 lM sodium
nitroprusside (SNP) or (C) 100 lM/10 lM glutamate/glycine (Glu/Gly) for 16-
18 h. MTT-assay shows that CA represents the most neuroprotective polyphenol
with its high impact in different oxidative systems (Taram, Winter, and
Linseman 2016).
6
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

9 activation (Park 2013). Recently, the neuroprotective effect
of CGA has been explored against Al-induced oxidative
damage in primary hippocampal neurons. These studies
have clarified that CGA exhibits its effect involving a chela-
tion of Al3þ and a decrease in oxidative stress through the
Nrf2 pathway. In fact, CGA (50 and 100 lM) remarkably
increases the activities of superoxide dismutase, catalase,
glutathione peroxidase, glutathione S-transferase, creatine
kinase, and AChE, and decreases the rate of ATP hydrolysis
(Wang et al. 2017). CA and CGA also displayed a direct and
potent effect against nitric oxide donor, sodium nitroprus-
side (SNP) (Oboh et al. 2013; Taram, Winter, and Linseman
2016) (Figure 3B). Some studies have shown that CGA and
vanillic acid also exhibit a cytoprotective effect against meth-
ylglioxal-mediated neuronal cell apoptosis and advanced gly-
cation end-products (AGEs) formation (Huang et al. 2008;
Fernandez-Gomez et al. 2015). These mechanisms have an
important role for example in AD and in diabetes neur-
opathy, another neurodegenerative disorder responsible for
inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and protein aggre-
gation (Huang et al. 2008; Tajes et al. 2014).
The literature shows an increasing interest for caffeoyl-
quinic acid derivatives (3,5-diCQA, 3,4-diCQA, 4,5-diCQA)
from different extracts. They exhibit neuroprotective proper-
ties, mainly via antioxidant actions, for example suppressing
H2O2–induced caspase-3 activation and H2O2–induced GSH
depletion or protecting from Glu neurotoxicity and lipid
peroxidation with a similar mechanism to that of CGA
(Nakajima et al. 2007; Mikami and Yamazawa 2015).
Some studies on FA from different natural sources show
its moderate neuroprotective effect, due to its action against
oxidative stress-related apoptosis, inflammation and inflam-
mation-induced oxidative stress, protecting from excitotoxic-
ity induced by Glu as CA (Figure 3C). In fact, the
therapeutic effects of FA from different plants are mediated
through its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, as
evident in rat models of cerebral ischemia (Cheng et al.
2008; Sgarbossa, Giacomazza, and di Carlo 2015; Taram,
Winter, and Linseman 2016) or depression (Lenzi et al.
2015). Some experiments on a chinese herb rich in FA have
suggested another hypothesis for the neuroprotection mech-
anism. FA probably involves the MAO system and opioid
receptors, with a neuropathologic mechanism similar to that
of depression and potential implications for neuropathic
pain (Xu et al. 2016b). Among the compounds responsible
for coffee neuroprotective effect, the diterpene cafestol, a
known Nrf2-activator, plays a very important role, as it is
evident in AD and PD models (Trinh et al. 2010).
Coffee antioxidant activity is correlated with roasting
degree (Opitz et al. 2017). Some studies have demonstrated
that even though CGA content decreased with roasting,
roasted coffee maintains its antioxidant activity, probably
because of CGA products. For example, CGA coffee degrad-
ation products, mainly 2-methoxy-4-vinylphenol and pyro-
cathecol exhibited higher antioxidant activities than CGA
(Kamiyama et al. 2015). Also melanoidins, obtained in roast-
ing conditions and accounted for up to 25% of coffee dry
matter, exhibit antioxidant properties, which decrease with
the increasing of roasting severity (Borrelli et al. 2002; Opitz
et al. 2017).
Nowadays, among coffee components, quercetin could
represent the major neuroprotective compound, because of
its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities with interest-
ing therapeutic application for AD, PD, TBI, and other
neuronal lesions (see section Anti-inflammatory activity and
Neurothrophic activity). Quercetin, in comparison with CF
and CGA, demonstrated the most protective effect on neuronal
cells, inhibiting glial and Glu-mediated toxicity (Yang et al.
2014; Lee, McGeer, and McGeer 2016; Wang et al. 2018;
Suganthy et al. 2016). It induces apoptosis through different
pathways, mainly caspase, AMP kinase, and p38 activation
(Suganthy et al. 2016). In Figure 4, a comparison between the
principal neuroprotective mechanisms and antioxidant effects
of CGA, its derivatives and quercetin is reported.
Figure 4. Principal mechanisms of neuroprotection and antioxidant effects of decaffeinated coffee.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
7

Anti-inflammatory activity
The immune efficiency, in particular of microglia, and
inflammatory responses play a very important role in neuro-
degenerative disorders, mainly in depression. In fact, Nrf2
pathway participates in depressive disorders through an
anti-inflammatory mechanism (Stephenson et al. 2018; Hall
et al. 2015). CF controls microglia-mediated neuroinflamma-
tory response associated with many neurodegenerative con-
ditions (Kang et al. 2012; Madeira et al. 2017). It is well
known that CF decreases hippocampal levels of pro-inflam-
matory mediators (e.g. TNF-a, IL-12, IFN-c, PGE2 and NO)
in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated microglia (Cao et al.
2009; Kang et al. 2012). Coffee intake increases plasma levels
of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF), IL-10 and
IL-6, preventing the decline into dementia and AD for MCI
subjects (Cao et al. 2011; Cao et al. 2012). Neither caffeine
alone nor DCC has a similar effect, indicating that this is
caused by the synergy of CF and other coffee components
(Cao et al. 2011; Lee, McGeer, and McGeer 2016).
To date, CA and CGA anti-inflammatory activity in the
CNS remains unclear, but many studies are present in litera-
ture starting from the first work of dos Santos exploring
CGA anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects (dos Santos
et al. 2006). CA (Hall et al. 2015; Basu Mallik et al. 2016),
CAPE (Hall et al. 2015; Tsai et al. 2015), CGA (Hall et al.
2015; Shen et al. 2012), and also quercetin (Lee, McGeer,
and McGeer 2016; Spagnuolo, Moccia, and Russo 2017;
Suganthy et al. 2016) could interfere more effectively than
CF with NF-kB pathway, which is important, for example,
in depression. These compounds inhibit the expression of
pro-inflammatory factors (mainly TNF-a, IL-1b and IFN-c),
NO production and microglial activation by LPS, and, by
consequence, prevent neuronal, but not glial, cell death
(Figure 5A–B). A long-term administration of FA (4 weeks)
interfers with microglia activation and IL-1b production, too
(Kim et al. 2004; Ojha et al. 2015). Microglia is involved in
brain development and maturation and in neuronal turnover
and it is also responsible for the release of different pro or
anti-inflammatory factors, which influences neuronal sur-
vival. The role of activated microglia, coupled with oxidative
stress and neuroinflammation, is very important in many
neurodegenerative disorders, such as AD, PD, HIV-associ-
ated dementia and MS. In particular, LPS is one of the first
microglia-mediated selective dopaminergic toxin able to
induce dopamine neuron death (Block and Hong 2005; Wu
et al. 2014). The role of coffee remains controversial in RA,
which is a chronic autoimmune inflammation disease, asso-
ciated with changes in CNS modulation of chronic pain
(Lee, Nassikas, and Clauw 2011; Lee, Bae, and Song 2014).
CF has a potential immunosuppressive role, because of a
suppression of T cells and antibody production, by promot-
ing
an
accumulation
of
the
immunomudulator
cAMP
(Sharif et al. 2017). Some studies have shown that high cof-
fee intake causes an increased risk of RA, probably mediated
by rheumatoid factor production (Lee, Bae, and Song 2014;
van Beers-Tas, Turk, and van Schaardenburg 2015; Sharif
et al. 2017). Only old studies showed that a similar RA risk
occurs also with DCC (Sharif et al. 2017). Nevertheless, the
antioxidant activity of coffee polyphenols could have an
important role in scavenging ROS, which are involved in
autoimmune processes (Sharif et al. 2017). Nowadays, the
activity of CGA alone against RA is under investigation;
some studies on CGA isolated from other plants demon-
strated that it inhibits T cells, cytokines, receptor activator
of NF-jB ligand (RANKL)-mediated osteoclast differenti-
ation, LPS-induced inflammatory response, and bone loss
(Chauhan et al. 2012; Kwak et al. 2013)
Only recently, QA have been explored for its role as anti-
neuroinflammatory agent with important implications for
atherosclerosis (Jang et al. 2017).
A minor coffee component with antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory
activity
is
eicosanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamide
(EHT). Pioneristic studies suggested that these properties
allow to have an important neuroprotective role in PD and
AD, inhibiting alpha-synuclein (a-syn) aggregation and pro-
tein tau phosphorylation (see section Anti-amyloid activity
and Regulation of tau phosphorylation) (Lee et al. 2013;
Basurto-Islas et al. 2014).
Figure 5. (A) Effect of a pretreatment (2 h) with caffeine (CAF), CGA, flavone
(FLA), and quercetin (QUE) alone (10 mg/mL each) or in mixtures on SH-SY5Y
cell viability, mediated by LPS/IFNc-stimulated THP-1 cells. CGA, flavone and
quercetin, but not caffeine, decreased SH-SY5Y cell viability loss and in particu-
lar quercetin demonstrated to have the major effect. (B) Effect of a pretreat-
ment (8 h) with caffeine or quercetin at different concentrations on SH-SY5Y
cell viability, induced by LPS/IFNc-activated microglia. Quercetin demonstrated
the most protective effect against the toxicity of LPS/IFN-c-stimulated microglia
(Lee, McGeer, and McGeer 2016).
8
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

Neurotrophic activity
Brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is essential for
neuronal growth, survival and cell differentiation. Moreover,
it is involved in learning and memory processes, by binding
to its main functional receptor (neural receptor protein-tyro-
sine kinase-b, TrkB), mainly present in the hippocampus
and cortex. The binding BDNF-TrkB is involved in the
pathophysiology
of
AD
and
a
chronic
CF
treatment
increases the expression of hippocampal BDNF-TrkB, pro-
tecting reversing memory impairment (Costa et al. 2008;
Ghoneim et al. 2015). In addition, recent studies, yet to be
confirmed, suggest that CF could also to interfere with glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the main protein constitu-
ent of glial intermediate filaments for astrocytes, and with
Ki-67 which has a potential role in the pathogenesis of
neurofibrillary degeneration in AD (Ghoneim et al. 2015).
Polyphenols are studied for their effect on hippocampal
cell proliferation and differentiation and considering the
potential relation between neurogenesis and depression, they
could represent an interesting strategy against depression
and anxiety (Dias et al. 2012). CGA neuroprotective effect is
mainly due to its antioxidant activity, but also to other
mechanisms. In fact, CGA and its metabolite, m-coumaric
acid, promote hippocampal neurite outgrowth, stimulating
directly the cerebral nerves, supporting neuroplasticity, and
activating the benzodiazepine receptor (Ito et al. 2008; Dias
et al. 2012). FA induces the astrocyte activation, mediated
by GFAP, and the proliferation of neural stem cells and pro-
genitor cells, which are precursors to neurons and glia in
the CNS and factors involved in depression (Yan et al 2001;
Yabe et al. 2010; Hall et al. 2015). Regarding on CA, its
amide derivatives with long alkyl chain seem to have prom-
ising effect in neurogenesis (Moosavi et al. 2017).
Quercetin increases the release of neurothrophic factors
through different pathways (phospho-CREB, Akt, Na-K-Cl
cotransporter), enhancing neurogenesis (Suganthy et al.
2016). Recent studies determined a potential role of quer-
cetin in nerve and axonal regeneration and astrocyte activa-
tion, during Spinal cord injury (SCI), which is a common
CNS lesion (Wang et al. 2018). This molecule reduces the
immunoreactivity of degenerating neurons and promotes
neuronal, axonal and electrophysiological function recovery
(see section Electrophysiological activity), via inhibiting
inflammatory responses and JAK2/STAT3 signaling path-
way, involved in SCI (Wang et al. 2018).
Anti-acetylcholinesterase activity
Cholinergic
nerves
and
cortical
ACh
transmission
are
involved into motor and memory performances (Acquas,
Tanda, and Di Chiara 2002). It is well known that CF inter-
feres
with
AChE-mediated
neurotransmission
(Acquas,
Tanda, and Di Chiara 2002; Pohanka and Dobes 2013;
Mohamed et al. 2013). This substance acts as a noncompeti-
tive inhibitor of AChE, blocking the anionic sites of AChE
and improving cognitive functions. It is approximately a
1000-times
weaker
inhibitor
of
AChE
(CF
IC50 ¼ 7.25 ± 0.70 lM) than tacrine (IC50 ¼ 0.16 ± 0.01 lM)
and
a
14,000-times
weaker
inhibitor
than
donepezil
(IC50 ¼ 0.04 ± 0.004 lM). Moreover, CF is a very weak
(IC50 > 50 lM) inhibitor of butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), the
second key-enzyme of AD (Pohanka and Dobes 2013;
Mohamed et al. 2013). However, CF data correlated to AChE
require additional investigations, because of some studies
revealed mechanisms that needed to be clarified. In fact, a
moderate-high caffeine intake interferes with donepezil (the
most used cholinesterase inhibitor for AD), increasing its anti-
oxidant property, but reducing its anticholinesterase effect, as
demonstrated also with in vivo studies (Oboh, Ogunsuyi, and
Olonisola 2017). A chronic maternal CF intake seems to
decrease AChE activity, but with no alteration in AChE tran-
scriptional regulation, causing important alterations in neuro-
motor development (Souza et al. 2015). Recent studies have
shown that CF protective effect in AD patients could depend
also from a peripherical mechanism, which involves AChE of
red blod cells (RBCs) membranes. Ab peptides cause RBC and
vascular modifications of brain capillaries. CF inhibits AChE
activity and interfers with Ab-AChE complex formation and
its signaling pathway, inhibiting protein kinase C (PKC) activ-
ity and reactivating endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS),
processes involved in RBC membrane functions (Carelli-
Alinovi et al. 2016).
CGA seems to inhibit AChE activity and, together with
its
positive
action
on
MDA
levels
(see
section
Neuroprotection and antioxidant-activity) in the cortex and
hippocampus,
it
improves
cognitive
impairments
and
amnesia in scopolamine-induced models of AD. These
mechanisms involve a direct CGA action on ROS of brain,
vascular and cellular compartments, and also on pro-oxi-
dants (Kwon et al. 2010; Oboh et al. 2013). In particular,
CA, in comparison with CGA, exhibits a slightly stronger
activity
against
AChE
(IC50 ¼ 4.21 ± 0.02 lg/mL
vs
IC50 ¼ 8.01 ± 0.01 lg/mL) and BChE (IC50 ¼ 5.60 ± 0.01 lg/
mL vs IC50 ¼ 6.30 ± 0.02 lg/mL) (Oboh et al. 2013). Anti-
AChE activity of CA, coupled with other actions, such as
reduction in nitrite and GSH levels, in glutathione-S-trans-
ferase (GST) activity and in p53 and p-p38 MAPK protein
expression, makes this molecule an interesting treatment in
different types of brain damage and dementia (Khan et al.
2013a; Wang et al. 2016). The inhibitory activity of 50 lM
FA
against
AChE
and
BuChE
is
very
low,
with
IC50 > 100 lM and inhibitory activity <5%, respectively
(Pan et al. 2016).
Anti-Acetylcholinesterase activity of quercetin is still
under investigation. High doses reduce AChE and BuChE
activity (IC50  200 mM) (Maciel et al. 2016; Suganthy et al.
2016; Ademosun et al. 2016). Recently, a study demon-
strated that quercetin could represent a potential treatment
to prevent cognitive dysfunctions in patients with type 2
diabetes, possibly thanks to its anti-AChE activity in the
brain (Maciel et al. 2016).
Anti-amyloid activity
The process of protein aggregation has been studied and
debated in relation to neuronal degeneration and dysfunction,
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
9

disease, and death. Nowadays, it is well known that this mech-
anism is a characteristic feature of many neurodegenerative
disorders, such as AD, PD, ALS, and HD. Regarding AD, it is
characterized by different aggregates: the extracellular amyloid
plaques (i.e. aggregates of amyloid fibrils) and the intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles (i.e. aggregates of hyperphosphorylated
tau protein, see section Regulation of tau phosphorylation).
During the past 25 years, the “amyloid b-protein (Ab) hypoth-
esis” has become the principal model of AD pathogenesis and
Ab1-40 and Ab1-42 peptides, which are secreted by a cleavage
of the Ab precursor Protein (AbPP), constitute the principal
components of amyloid plaques and the main AD biomarkers.
In addition, soluble oligomers of Ab peptides represent the
most neurotoxic species (Ross and Poirier 2004; Lansbury and
Lashuel 2006; Selkoe and Hardy 2016).
It is well known that coffee can decrease plasma Ab levels
in AD, HIV-associated dementia and other cognitive impair-
ments disorders and some studies have shown that long CF
treatment exhibits a direct effect on AbPP, inhibiting the
two enzymes (b and c-secretase) responsible for Ab produc-
tion and interfering with Ab-degrading enzymes (Arendash
et al. 2006; Cao et al. 2009; Arendash and Cao 2010; Qosa
et al. 2012; Flaten et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2015; Soliman,
Geiger, and Chen 2017). The positive effect of CF in Ab
clearance
was
also
demonstrated
after
a
single
acute
treatment on AD animal models, showing lower plasma and
brain interstitial fluid levels of Ab1-40 and Ab1-42 within
few hours, in contrast to DCC. In addition, it seems that CF
acts as cognitive enhancer only in AD patients and not in
normal subjects (Cao et al. 2009; Arendash and Cao 2010).
A treatment with CF followed by melatonin on neuro 2a/
AbPP cells exhibit a synergistic anty-amyloidogenic effect,
decreasing Ab1-40/Ab1-42 and Ab1-42 oligomers levels
(Zhang et al. 2015). The mechanism of CF anti-aggregating
activity could involve brain adenosine levels, but not A1R
and A2AR (Arendash et al. 2006). Recently, some studies
have shown that CF decreases Ab generation and oligomer-
ization, blocking the internalization of LDL cholesterol and
of AbAPP, which are mediated by a specific adenosine A3
receptor (A3AR) (Li et al. 2015a). According to some
authors, a potential secondary mechanism in the decreasing
of Ab levels does not involve adenosine receptors, but an
interaction with mithocondrial membranes with a small
increase of mithocondrial function, a known target of Ab
oligomers (Dragicevic et al. 2012). Also PD is characterized
by protein aggregates, named as Lewy bodies, in which the
main component is a-synuclein. These aggregates have
fibrillar structures similar to the fibrils found in the brains
of AD patients. CF decreases the formation of a-synuclein
aggregates and reduces their toxicity and oxidative damage,
Figure 6. (A, B) Effects of crude caffeine (CC) and caffeine treatment (2 months) on Ab1-42 levels (A) and amyloid plaque numbers (B), in a mouse model (AbPP
transgenic mouse) of AD. CC treatment reduces the peptide level in tissue and the number of plaques in the hippocampus. (C) Effects of CC (50 ng/mL) and caffeine
(45 ng/mL) treatment (2 h) on VAChT-positive cholinergic neurons in Ab25-35-treated cultures. CC and caffeine increased the number of cholinergic neurons, pro-
tecting them against Ab25-35 toxicity (Chu et al. 2012).
10
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

in which A2AR seem to be involved (Kardani and Roy 2015;
Kachroo and Schwarzschild 2012).
Crude caffeine, the main by product of DCC, is rich in
CA, coumaric and vanillic acid, quercetin and catechin, and,
it is not only a well known antioxidant and anti-inflamma-
tory agent, but also it is able to reduce Ab1-42 levels and
amyloid plaque deposition in hippocampus, with greater
effects than CF on learning and memory impairment
(Figure 6A–B). (Chu et al. 2012). Studies on CGA and CA
from different plants exhibit a moderate effect on Ab1-42
(Miyamae et al. 2012; Wei et al. 2016; Di Giovanni et al.
2010) and a-syn self-aggregation (Masuda et al. 2006; Fazili
and Naeem 2015; Di Giovanni et al. 2010). Some authors
have shown that CGA has a protective role against dopa-
mine-related oligomerization of a-syn, acting on dopamine
oxidation and directly on oligomerization and by conse-
quence decreasing a-syn toxicity (Teraoka et al. 2012).
These compounds and their metabolites inhibit fibril forma-
tion of other amyloidogenic proteins involved in metabolic
diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, correlated with AD and
PD (Cheng et al. 2011). CA and its derivative Dihydrocaffeic
acid (DHCA), conjugated with the most amyloidogenic
sequences Ab38-42 and Ab40-42, could be used as multi-
functional agents, since they inhibit fibril formation and Ab
peptide-induced intracellular oxidative stress (Arai et al.
2016). In addition, CA and its derivative CAPE have a direct
effect on enzymes involved in Ab processing and are able to
restore the decrease of a-secretase and the increase of b-sec-
retase caused by acrolein (Huang et al. 2013). CQA-related
compounds, in particular 4,5-di-CQA and 3,4,5-tri-O-caf-
feoylquinic acid (3,4,5-tri-CQA), strongly inhibited Ab1-42
aggregation (Miyamae et al. 2012; Miyamae et al. 2011).
In vitro studies on FA have shown that this compound
exhibits an antioligomerization and antifibrillogenic activity
against Ab1-40 from the early states of aggregation, induc-
ing the formation of nonfibrillar amorphous aggregates, sus-
ceptible to disaggregation into monomers (Bramanti et al.
2013). FA seems to have an antioligomerization effect also
against the more amyloidogenic Ab1-42, but it seems to
accelerate the transition from oligomers to fibrils (Cui et al.
2013), even if some authors classified them as “short fibrils”,
assuming a moderate anti-fibrillogenic effect, as evident also
with a-syn (Ono and Yamada 2006; Jagota and Rajadas
2012). FA has a strong specificity for Ab1-42 monomers
and fibrils compared with oligomers; in particular, it inter-
acts with His14 and Glu22 residues, which have an high
propensity of b-sheet formation (Cui et al. 2013). In add-
ition, FA destabilizes Ab1-40, Ab1-42, and a-syn preformed
fibrils, showing to act mainly against fibril elongation (Ono,
Hirohata,
and Yamada
2005; Ono and Yamada
2006;
Sgarbossa et al. 2013; Sgarbossa, Giacomazza, and di Carlo
2015). Some recent studies have also shown an antioligome-
rization effect against a-syn; in fact, FA acts inhibiting the
formation of tetramers and high oligomers or blocking
oligomerization when 25 or 250 lM FA is coincubated with
25 lM a-syn (Takahashi et al. 2015). The anti-amyloid activ-
ity of FA in vivo remains controversial. In vivo experiments
do not demonstrate its activity against Ab oligomers and
fibrils (Hamaguchi et al. 2009; Sgarbossa, Giacomazza, and
di Carlo 2015). Only recently, the interest in FA with its
potential application in many diseases is increasing and FA
derivatives and tacrine-FA hybrids have been proposed as
potential multifunctional drugs in the treatment of cerebral
ischemia, AD, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (Fu et al.
2016; Sang et al. 2017).
QA, cinnamic acid and methyl CGA do not seem to have
any effect on Ab1-42 fibril formation (Miyamae et al. 2012),
but recent studies discovered a potential antifibrillogenic
activity of the polyol QA, as shown by some data on
glyoxal-induced aggregation which involves cystatin, a prote-
ase inhibitor of cellular metabolism with a natural propen-
sity to form amyloid aggregates in various aggregation
disorders (Shamsi, Ahmed, and Bano 2016). A strong antifi-
brillogenic effect was confirmed for quercetin on Ab protein
(Di Giovanni et al. 2010; Jimenez-Aliaga et al. 2011; Regitz,
Dußling, and Wenzel 2014; Sabogal-Guaqueta et al. 2015;
Suganthy et al. 2016), alpha-synuclein (Di Giovanni et al.
2010; Zhu, Han, and Fink 2013; Suganthy et al. 2016), and
cystatins (Khan et al. 2013b), which are proteins prone to
fibrillogenesis. Another study also revealed a direct positive
effect of EHT on phosphatase systems, which regulate Ab
and a-syn formation and accumulation with important neu-
roprotective effects in preventing AD and PD (Basurto-Islas
et al. 2014; Lee et al. 2013).
Protection against amyloid toxicity
CF exhibits a well known protection against Ab-induced
neutotoxicity and cognitive dysfunction, blocking hippocam-
pal A2AR through p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) phosphorylation and improving mnemonic func-
tions with promising neuroprotective effect in AD (Dall’Igna
et al. 2007; Canas et al. 2009). The effect of CF and crude
caffeine against Ab toxicity is comparable, as evident in
Ab25-35-treated
cholinergic
neurons
(Figure
6C)
(Chu
et al. 2012).
As mentioned above, a long-term administration of FA
has been reported to have important preventive effect
against Ab1-42 toxicity, due to its mechanism of action,
which involves the activation of hippocampal astrocytes and
their production of some neurotrophic factors (Yan et al.
2001; Kim et al. 2004; Cui et al. 2013). According to some
authors, FA inhibited cytotoxicity induced by Ab1-42 mono-
mers more effectively than that induced by Ab1-42 oligom-
ers (Cui et al. 2013), while according to others, FA
protective effect against amyloid toxicity is due to its inter-
action with Ab or a-syn oligomers (Jagota and Rajadas
2012; Takahashi et al. 2015). A few studies published about
ten years ago, showed that the more hydrophobic ferulic
acid ethil esther (FAEE) could be a neuroprotector against
Ab1-42-induced toxicity for its anti-oxidant and anti-inflam-
matory properties, and its capacity to interfere with Ab
aggregation, mainly due to its lipophilicity (Sultana et al.
2005; Perluigi et al. 2006).
Some studies concerning different plant products showed
that CGA (Wei et al. 2016), CA (Wei et al. 2016; Kim et al.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
11

2015), dicaffeoylquinic acids (such as 3,5-diCQA and 4,5-
diCQA) (Wei et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2013), and 3,4,5-tri-
CQA (Miyamae et al. 2011) have a protective effect against
Ab-induced neurotoxicity). This could be due to an upre-
gulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (Deng et al.
2013). As it is evident on neuronal model cell PC12, CA
exhibits a protective effect against Ab- and a-syn-induced
toxicity, involving a decrease in intracellular calcium level
and Ab-mediated tau-phosphorylation (Sul et al. 2009; Di
Giovanni et al. 2010). Recent studies have shown that also
quercetin significantly protected PC12 cells from death
induced by Ab, interfering with Ab-induced paralysis and
Ab-induced BBB disruption (see section Protection of
blood-brain barrier integrity) or promoting autophagy, but
additional investigations are required (Regitz, Dußling, and
Wenzel 2014; Li et al. 2015b; Suganthy et al. 2016; Li
et al. 2017).
Protection of blood-brain barrier integrity
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunctions are associated with
many neurodegenerative disorders, such as AD, PD, brain
edema and trauma, ischemic stroke, MS, and HIV-associated
dementia. It is well known the role of CF as a neuroprotec-
tor against BBB dysfunction and disruption with its action
of blocking cell surface adenosine receptors (A2AR and
A2BR),
inhibiting
cAMP
phosphodiesterase
activity
and
mobilizing calcium from ER (Chen et al. 2008; Cao et al.
2009; Chen, Ghribi, and Geiger 2010). In addition, a chronic
ingestion of CF modulates the disruption of BBB, caused by
high dietary levels of cholesterol, which could represent a
risk factor for AD. Its mechanism of action is poorly under-
stood; CF seems to not affect plasma levels of cholesterol,
but it blocks the activation of astrocytes and microglia and
increases the expression of tight junction proteins (import-
ant for membrane integrity), by opposing BBB disruption
and high level of cholesterol effects (Chen et al. 2008). An
upregulation of lipoprotein receptor related protein-1 and/or
P-glycoprotein by CF is also responsible for Ab clearance
(Qosa et al. 2012).
Some studies have shown that matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), mainly MMP-2 and MMP-9, and tissue-type plas-
minogen activator (tPA) have a critical role in BBB disrup-
tion and in the pathogenesis of stroke. In particular, MMPs
have a deleterious role in the early phase of ischemic stroke,
by degrading neurovascular matrix and by disrupting BBB
tight junctions (Jin, Yang, and Li 2010). CGA and DHCA
inhibit MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression and activity, reduc-
ing consequently ischemic brain edema and BBB damage
(Lee, Lee, and Bu 2015). Only few studies are present in lit-
erature on the action of phenolic acids in relation to BBB
and this could be also ascribed to their very low rate to
cross BBB, in contrast to CF (Lardeau and Poquet 2013).
Quercetin protects BBB and brain microvascular endothelial
cells from the disruption, acting directly against the damage
induced by Ab fibrils, too (Li et al. 2015b).
Electrophysiological activity
Naþ, Kþ-ATPase plays an important role in learning and
memory and many studies reported a decrease of its activity
induced by brain cholinergic dysfunction and Ab in AD oxi-
dative stress. This causes an increase in intracellular level of
Ca2þ and cell death, particularly in the hippocampus (Zhang
et al. 2013; Wostyn et al. 2011). The subsequent Ca2þ
release involves the ryanodine receptors (RyRs) and this
process regulates many neuronal functions, such as spike
activity, synaptic plasticity, modulation of membrane excit-
ability and gene expression in primary neurons with import-
ant consequences in aging and AD (Smith et al. 2005;
Frazier et al. 2017).
A long-term CF consumption increases the expression of
Naþ, Kþ-ATPase, facilitates cerebrospinal fluid production,
turnover and clearance, and regulates intracellular Ca2þ levels
(Wostyn et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2013). Also a pretreatment
with CA (20 lg/mL) decreases the changes in intracellular
Ca2þ levels, induced by Ab (Sul et al. 2009).
Voltage-gated potassium channels (Kvs) are key regula-
tors of membrane potential in sensory neurons and their
malfunction is responsible for neuronal excitability disorders
in various pathologic conditions, such as epilepsy, chronic
pain, AD, autism, and MS (Frazzini et al. 2016). CGA acti-
vates at a lower threshold the two main subtypes of Kvs in
trigeminal ganglion neuron, also in inflammation conditions.
KVS are the dominant sustained K-current (IK,V) channel
and the fast inactivating transient A-current (IK,A) channel,
which have different roles in regulating the firing frequency
and membrane potentials. 0.2 mM and 1 mM CGA caused a
significant reduction in the activation and inactivation
thresholds of IK,A and IK,V, and the velocity of the action
depends on CGA concentrations. The consequence of CGA
effect is the decrease of neuronal excitability with positive
results in the therapy of neurophatic and neuro-inflamma-
tory pain (Zhang et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2016a). CGA mech-
anism clarifies also the importance of KVS as potential
therapeutic
target
for
inflammatory
conditions
(Liu
et al. 2016a).
As mentioned above, the neurothrophic effect of quer-
cetin is closely connected to its electrophysiological activity
(Wang et al. 2018; Suganthy et al. 2016). First studies on the
role of this molecule on voltage-dependent sodium channels
in hippocampal neurons date back to 2010. Quercetin
decreased the amplitude of the voltage-dependent sodium
channel currents in a dose (0.3-30 lM) and voltage-depend-
ent way with important neuroprotective effect in cerebral
ischemia and vascular dementia (Yao et al. 2010). Quercetin
acts also on voltage-dependent Ca2þ channels (VDCCs) in
cerebral cortex nerve terminals, decreasing presynaptic cal-
cium and Glu release (Lu, Lin, and Wang 2013). Some
recent studies on animal models of SCI have demonstrated
that quercetin is responsible for an electrophysiological func-
tion recovery after SCI, thanks to a direct effect on somato-
sensory and motor evoked potentials (Wang et al. 2018).
Quercetin exhibits a vasodilatatory action on Kvs, as evident
in muscle cells of the rat tail main artery and this is prob-
ably due to a Protein Kinase G-mediated stimulation of
12
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

KCa1.1 channels, responsible for vascular tone regulation
(Iozzi et al. 2013). Regarding the mitochondrial dysfunction
caused by Ab deposition, the action of quercetin seems to
be linked to a recovery of mitochondrial membrane poten-
tial (Wang et al. 2014).
Regulation of tau phosphorylation
Neurodegenerative
disorders
with
tau
inclusions
are
referred to as tauopathies. These include mainly: AD, prion
diseases, and some genetic forms of PD and CTE. Protein
tau
promotes
microtubule
assembly
and
stabilization,
axonal transport and regulation of actin, neurite outgrowth
and
regulation
of
signaling
(Morris
et
al.
2011).
Tauopathies are characterized by the presence of intracellu-
lar fibrillar aggregates of hyper- and abnormally-phosphory-
lated tau proteins, which are observed in brain stem, cortex,
hippocampus, and finally neocortex (Sergeant et al. 2008).
Hyperphosphorylation and other post-translational modifi-
cations give rise to a pathologic tau, responsible for dys-
functions in microtubule assembly and in synaptic and
mitochondrial activities (Sergeant et al. 2008; Morris et al.
2011; Fontaine et al. 2015; Kulbe and Hall 2017). We have
already mentioned how TBI can be linked to the tauopathy
of CTE; in fact, serum tau level represents an important
biomarker of TBI and other head injuries (Kulbe and Hall
2017). Recent studies on TBI patients also suggest a new
mechanism, which connects tau hyperphosphorylation with
A2AR activation and this opens interesting perspectives for
a TBI strategy which targets A2AR signaling via tau phos-
phorylation (Zhao et al. 2017).
There are only a few studies on coffee activity relation-
ship for the modulation of tau phosphorylation. A CF
chronic intake exhibits important results in AD-related tauo-
pathies animal models and in in vitro HIV-associated
dementia models, reducing the level of tau phosphorylation
and/or truncation and consequently neuroinflammation and
memory deficit (Laurent et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014;
Soliman, Geiger, and Chen 2017). This effect can also be
due to a downregulation of Akt system, as regulator of
apoptotic mechanism (Laurent et al. 2014).
Among coffee components, CA (10–20 lg/mL) exhibits
an effect on tau phosphorylation caused by Ab, as above
mentioned (Sul et al. 2009). EHT regulates tau phosphoryl-
ation; in fact, a chronic EHT intake has important benefi-
cial effects against abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation,
towards a dephosphorylation of AbPP and an inhibition of
the
demethylation
of
phosphoprotein
phosphatase
2A
(PP2A), which accounts for 70% of the total phospho-tau
phosphatase activity (Basurto-Islas et al. 2014). Recent stud-
ies have shown that quercetin can suppress and reverse tau
hyperphosphorylation through an effect on tau-effectors
proteins such as kinase and chaperone inhibitors (Sabogal-
Guaqueta
et
al.
2015;
Suganthy
et
al.
2016;
Jiang
et al. 2016).
Conclusions
This review focuses the attention on the role of non-caffeine
compounds and decaffeinated coffee in the prevention and
modulation of neurological disorders. Among the discussed
phenolic acids, the most studied molecules, CGA and CA,
exhibit many positive neurological effects as well as CF.
Also FA could be considered as a promising compound, act-
ing mainly not only as an anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory
and neurotrophic agent, but also as protecting against amyl-
oid toxicity. On the contrary, its role on Ab aggregation is
still not clarified. In addition, many recent studies on quer-
cetin show its great potential both for its antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory properties, and for its effect against amyl-
oid (Ab and a-syn) aggregation and toxicity and tau hyper-
phosphorylation. About molecules such as QA and EHT,
very little is still present in literature except for their well
known antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. Current
evidences show that decaffeinated coffee could be very
effective
against
neurodegeneration
acting
in
different
neurological pathways and disorders.
ORCID
Raffaella Colombo
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9675-6598
Adele Papetti
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1523-7759
References
Acquas, E., G. Tanda, and G. Di Chiara. 2002. Differential effects of
caffeine on dopamine and acetylcholine transmission in brain areas
of drug-naive and caffeine-pretreated rats. Neuropsychopharmacology
27 (2):182–193.
Ademosun, A. O., G. Oboh, F. Bello, and P. O. Ayeni. 2016.
Antioxidative properties and effect of quercetin and its glycosylated
form (Rutin) on acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase activ-
ities.
Journal
of
Evidence-Based
Complementary
&
Alternative
Medicine 21 (4):NP11–NP17.
Alcazar, A., P. L. Fernaandez-Caceres, M. J. Martın, F. Pablos, and
A. G. Gonzalez. 2003. Ion chromatographic determination of some
organic acids, chloride and phosphate in coffee and tea. Talanta 61
(2):95–101. .
Almeida, A. F., G. I. A. Borge, M. Piskula, A. Tudose, L. Tudoreanu,
K. Valentova, G. Williamson, and C. N. Santos. 2018. Bioavailability
of quercetin in humans with a focus on interindividual variation.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety 17 (3):
714–731..
Alonso-Salces, R. M., F. Serra, F. Reniero, and K. Heberger. 2009.
Botanical and geographical characterization of green coffee (Coffea
arabica and Coffea canephora): Chemometric evaluation of phenolic
and methylxanthine contents. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 57 (10):4224–4235.
Arai, T., A. Ohno, K. Mori, H. Kuwata, M. Mizuno, K. Imai, S. Hara,
M. Shibanuma, M. Kurihara, N. Miyata, et al. 2016. Inhibition of
amyloid fibril formation and cytotoxicity by caffeic acid-conjugated
amyloid-b C-terminal peptides. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry
Letters 26 (22):5468–5471.
Araujo, L. F., S. S. Mirza, D. Bos, W. J. Niessen, S. M. Barreto, A. van
der Lugt, M. W. Vernooij, A. Hofman, H. Tiemeier, and M. A.
Ikram. 2016. Association of coffee consumption with MRI markers
and
cognitive
function:
A
Population-Based
study.
Journal
of
Alzheimer’s Disease 53 (2):451–461.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
13

Arendash, G. W., and C. Cao. 2010. Caffeine and coffee as therapeutics
against Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20 Suppl
1:S117–S126. doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-091249.
Arendash, G. W., W. Schleif, K. Rezai-Zadeh, E. K. Jackson, L. C.
Zacharia, J. R. Cracchiolo, D. Shippy, and J. Tan. 2006. Caffeine
protects Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment and reduces
brain b-amyloid production. Neuroscience 142 (4):941–952. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.07.021.
Ascherio, A., H. Chen, M. A. Schwarzschild, S. M. Zhang, G. A.
Colditz, and F. E. Speizer. 2003. Caffeine, postmenopausal estrogen,
and risk of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 60 (5):790–795. doi:
10.1212/01.WNL.0000046523.05125.87.
Azevedo, A. B. A. D., P. Mazzafera, R. S. Mohamed, S. A. B. V. D.
Melo, and T. G. Kieckbusch. 2008. Extraction of caffeine, chloro-
genic acids and lipids from green coffee beans using supercritical
carbon dioxide and co-solvents. Brazilian Journal of Chemical
Engineering 25 (3):543–552. doi:10.1590/S0104-66322008000300012.
Basu Mallik, S., J. Mudgal, M. Nampoothiri, S. Hall, S. A. Dukie, G.
Grant, C. M. Rao, and D. Arora. 2016. Caffeic acid attenuates lipo-
polysaccharide-induced sickness behaviour and neuroinflammation
in
mice.
Neuroscience
Letters
632:218–223.
doi:10.1016/
j.neulet.2016.08.044.
Basurto-Islas, G., J. Blanchard, Y. C. Tung, J. R. Fernandez, M.
Voronkov, M. Stock, S. Zhang, J. B. Stock, and K. Iqbal. 2014.
Therapeutic benefits of a component of coffee in a rat model of
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging 35 (12):2701–2712. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.06.012.
Beghi, E., E. Pupillo, P. Messina, G. Giussani, A. Chio, S. Zoccolella, C.
Moglia, M. Corbo, G. Logroscino, and EURALS Group. 2011. Coffee
and
amyotrophic
lateral
sclerosis:
A
possible
preventive
role.
American Journal of Epidemiology 174 (9):1002–1008. doi:10.1093/
aje/kwr229.
Bertrand, B., B. Guyot, F. Anthony, and P. Lasherme. 2003. Impact of
the coffea canephora gene introgression on beverage quality of C.
arabica. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 107 (3):387–394. doi:
10.1007/s00122-003-1203-6.
Bicho, N. C., A. E. Leit~ao, J. C. Ramalho, and F. C. Lidon. 2011.
Identification of chemical clusters discriminators of the roast degree
in arabica and robusta coffee beans. European Food Research and
Technology 233 (2):303–311. doi:10.1007/s00217-011-1518-5.
Block, M. L., and J. S. Hong. 2005. Microglia and inflammation-medi-
ated neurodegeneration: Multiple triggers with a common mechan-
ism.
Progress
in
Neurobiology
76
(2):77–98.
0.1016/
j.pneurobio.2005.06.004.
Borrelli, R. C., A. Visconti, C. Mennella, M. Anese, and V. Fogliano.
2002. Chemical characterization and antioxidant properties of coffee
melanoidins. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50 (22):
6527–6533. doi:10.1021/jf025686o.
Bramanti, E., L. Fulgentini, R. Bizzarri, F. Lenci, and A. Sgarbossa.
2013. b-Amyloid amorphous aggregates induced by the small nat-
ural molecule ferulic acid. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 117
(44):13816–13821. doi:10.1021/jp4079986.
Canas, P. M., L. O. Porciuncula, G. M. Cunha, C. G. Silva, N. J.
Machado, J. M. Oliveira, C. R. Oliveira, and R. A. Cunha. 2009.
Adenosine A2A receptor blockade prevents synaptotoxicity and
memory dysfunction caused by beta-amyloid peptides via p38 mito-
gen-activated
protein
kinase
pathway.
J
Neurosci
29
(47):
14741–14751. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3728-09.2009.
Cano-Marquina, A., J. J. Tarın, and A. Cano. 2013. The impact of cof-
fee
on
health.
Maturitas
75
(1):7–21.
doi:10.1016/
j.maturitas.2013.02.002.
Cao, C., J. R. Cirrito, X. Lin, L. Wang, D. K. Verges, A. Dickson, M.
Mamcarz, C. Zhang, T. Mori, G. W. Arendash, et al. 2009. Caffeine
suppresses amyloid-beta levels in plasma and brain of Alzheimer’s
disease transgenic mice. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 17 (3):
681–697. doi:10.3233/JAD-2009-1071.
Cao, C., D. A. Loewenstein, X. Lin, C. Zhang, L. Wang, R. Duara, Y.
Wu, A. Giannini, G. Bai, J. Cai, et al. 2012. High blood caffeine lev-
els in MCI linked to lack of progression to dementia. Journal of
Alzheimer’s Disease 30 (3):559–572. doi:10.3233/JAD-2012-111781.
Cao, C., L. Wang, X. Lin, M. Mamcarz, C. Zhang, G. Bai, J. Nong, S.
Sussman, and G. Arendash. 2011. Caffeine synergizes with another
coffee component to increase plasma GCSF: Linkage to cognitive
benefits in Alzheimer’s mice. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 25 (2):
323–335. doi:10.3233/JAD-2011-110110.
Caprioli, G., M. Cortese, G. Sagratini, and S. Vittori. 2015. The influ-
ence of different types of preparation (espresso and brew) on coffee
aroma and main bioactive constituents. International Journal of
Food
Sciences
and
Nutrition
66
(5):505–513.
doi:10.3109/
09637486.2015.1064871.
Carelli-Alinovi, C., S. Ficarra, A. M. Russo, E. Giunta, D. Barreca, A.
Galtieri, F. Misiti, and E. Tellone. 2016. Involvement of acetylcholin-
esterase and protein kinase C in the protective effect of caffeine
against b-amyloid-induced alterations in red blood cells. Biochimie
121:52–59. doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2015.11.022.
Chao, X. J., Z. W. Chen, A. M. Liu, X. X. He, S. G. Wang, Y. T. Wang,
P. Q. Liu, C. Ramassamy, S. H. Mak, W. Cui, et al. 2014. Effect of
tacrine-3-caffeic
acid,
a
novel
multifunctional
anti-Alzheimer’s
dimer, against oxidative-stress-induced cell death in HT22 hippo-
campal
neurons:
Involvement
of
Nrf2/HO-1
pathway.
CNS
Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (9):840–850. doi:10.1111/cns.12286.
Chauhan, P. S., N. K. Satti, P. Sharma, V. K. Sharma, K. A. Suri, and
S. Bani. 2012. Differential effects of chlorogenic acid on various
immunological
parameters
relevant
to
rheumatoid
arthritis.
Phytotherapy Research 26 (8):1156–1165. doi:10.1002/ptr.3684.
Chen, X., J. W. Gawryluk, J. F. Wagener, O. Ghribi, and J. D. Geiger.
2008. Caffeine blocks disruption of blood brain barrier in a rabbit
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neuroinflammation 5 (1):
12. 10.1186/1742-2094-5-12.
Chen, X., O. Ghribi, and J. D. Geiger. 2010. Caffeine protects against
disruptions
of
the
blood-brain
barrier
in
animal
models
of
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease
20 Suppl 1:S127–S141. doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-1376.
Cheng, B., X. Liu, H. Gong, L. Huang, H. Chen, X. Zhang, C. Li, M.
Yang, B. Ma, L. Jiao, et al. 2011. Coffee components inhibit amyloid
formation of human islet amyloid polypeptide in vitro: Possible link
between coffee consumption and diabetes mellitus. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 59 (24):13147–13155. doi:10.1021/
jf201702h.
Cheng, C. Y., S. Y. Su, N. Y. Tang, T. Y. Ho, S. Y. Chiang, and C. L.
Hsieh. 2008. Ferulic acid provides neuroprotection against oxidative
stress-related apoptosis after cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury by
inhibiting ICAM-1 mRNA expression in rats. Brain Research 1209:
136–150. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.090.
Cho, E. S., Y. J. Jang, M. K. Hwang, N. J. Kang, K. W. Lee, and H. J.
Lee. 2009. Attenuation of oxidative neuronal cell death by coffee
phenolic phytochemicals. Mutation Research 661 (1–2):18–24. doi:
10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.021.
Chu, Y. F., W. H. Chang, R. M. Black, J. R. Liu, P. Sompol, Y. Chen,
H. Wei, Q. Zhao, and I. H. Cheng. 2012. Crude caffeine reduces
memory impairment and amyloid b (1-42) levels in an Alzheimer’s
mouse model. Food Chemistry 135 (3):2095–2102. doi:10.1016/
j.foodchem.2012.04.148.
Clifford, M. N. 1985. Coffee: Botany, biochemistry and production of
beans and beverage, ed. M. N. Clifford and K. C. Willson, 305–374.
London, UK: Croom Helm.
Clifford, M. N., B. Indu, I. B. Jaganath, I. A. Ludwig, and A. Crozier.
2017. Chlorogenic acids and the acyl-quinic acids: Discovery, bio-
synthesis, bioavailability and bioactivity. Natural Product Reports 34
(12):1391–1421. doi:10.1039/c7np00030h.
Costa, M. S., P. H. Botton, S. Mioranzza, A. P. Ardais, J. D. Moreira,
D. O. Souza, and L. O. Porciuncula. 2008. Caffeine improves adult
mice performance in the object recognition task and increases
BDNF and TrkB independent on phospho-CREB immunocontent in
the hippocampus. Neurochemistry International 53 (3–4):89–94. doi:
10.1016/j.neuint.2008.06.006.
Crozier, T. W. M., A. Stalmach, M. E. J. Lean, and A. Crozier. 2012.
Espresso coffees, caffeine, and chlorogenic intake: Potential health
implication. Food & Function 3 (1):30–33. doi:10.1039/c1fo10240k.
14
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

Cui, L., Y. Zhang, H. Cao, Y. Wang, T. Teng, G. Ma, Y. Li, K. Li, and
Y. Zhang. 2013. Ferulic acid inhibits the transition of amyloid-b42
monomers to oligomers but accelerates the transition from oligom-
ers to fibrils. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 37 (1):19–28. doi:
10.3233/JAD-130164.
Dall’Igna, O. P., P. Fett, M. W. Gomes, D. O. Souza, R. A. Cunha, and
D. R. Lara. 2007. Caffeine and adenosine A(2a) receptor antagonists
prevent beta-amyloid (25-35)-induced cognitive deficits in mice.
Experimental
Neurology
203
(1):241–245.
doi:10.1016/
j.expneurol.2006.08.008.
Del Rio, D., A. Rodriguez-Mateos, J. P. Spencer, M. Tognolini, G.
Borges, and A. Crozier. 2013. Dietary (poly)phenolics in human
health: Structures, bioavailability, and evidence of protective effects
against chronic diseases. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 18 (14):
1818–1892. doi:10.1089/ars.2012.4581.
Del
Rio,
D.,
A.
Stalmach,
L.
Calani,
and
A.
Crozier.
2010.
Bioavailability of coffee chlorogenic acids and green tea flavan-3-ols.
Nutrients 2 (8):820–833. doi:10.3390/nu2080820.
Delgado-Andrade, C., F. J. Tessier, C. Niquet-Leridon, I. Seiquer, and
M. Pilar Navarro. 2012. Study of the urinary and faecal excretion of
N (epsilon)-carboxymethyllysine in young human volunteers. Amino
Acids 43 (2):595–602. doi:10.1007/s00726-011-1107-8.
Deng, J., X. L. Qi, Z. Z. Guan, X. M. Yan, Y. Huang, and Y. L. Wang.
2013. Pretreatment of SH-SY5Y cells with dicaffeoylquinic acids
attenuates the reduced expression of nicotinic receptors, elevated
level of oxidative stress and enhanced apoptosis caused by b-amyl-
oid peptide. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 65 (12):
1736–1744. doi:10.1111/jphp.12096.
Deshmukh, R., M. Kaundal, V. Bansal, and Samardeep. 2016. Caffeic
acid attenuates oxidative stress, learning and memory deficit in
intra-cerebroventricular streptozotocin induced experimental demen-
tia in rats. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy 81:56–62. doi:10.1016/
j.biopha.2016.03.017.
Deshpande, S., R. Jaiswal, M. F. Febi Matei, and N. Kuhnert. 2014.
Investigation of acyl migration in mono- and dicaffeoylquinic acids
under aqueous basic, aqueous acidic, and dry roasting conditions.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 62 (37):9160–9170. doi:
10.1021/jf5017384.
D’hooghe, M. B., P. Haentjens, G. Nagels, and J. De Keyser. 2012.
Alcohol, coffee, fish, smoking and disease progression in multiple
sclerosis.
European
Journal
of
Neurology
19
(4):616–624.
doi:
10.1111/j.1468-1331.2011.03596.x.
Di Giovanni, S., S. Eleuteri, K. E. Paleologou, G. Yin, M. Zweckstetter,
P. A. Carrupt, and H. A. Lashuel. 2010. Entacapone and tolcapone,
two catechol O-methyltransferase inhibitors, block fibril formation
of alpha-synuclein and beta-amyloid and protect against amyloid-
induced
toxicity.
Journal
of
Biological
Chemistry
285
(20):
14941–14954. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.080390.
Dias, G. P., N. Cavegn, A. Nix, M. C. do Nascimento Bevilaqua, D.
Stangl, M. S. Zainuddin, A. E. Nardi, P. F. Gardino, and S. Thuret.
2012. The role of dietary polyphenols on adult hippocampal neuro-
genesis: Molecular mechanisms and behavioural effects on depres-
sion and anxiety. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2012:
1–18. doi:10.1155/2012/541971.
dos Santos, M. D., M. C. Almeida, N. P. Lopes, and G. E. de Souza.
2006. Evaluation of the anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic
activities of the natural polyphenol chlorogenic acid. Biological &
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 29 (11):2236–2240.
Dostal, V., C. M. Roberts, and C. D. Link. 2010. Genetic mechanisms
of coffee extract protection in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of
b-amyloid peptide toxicity. Genetics 186 (3):857–866. doi:10.1534/
genetics.110.120436.
Dragicevic, N., V. Delic, C. Cao, N. Copes, X. Lin, M. Mamcarz, L.
Wang, G. W. Arendash, and P. C. Bradshaw. 2012. Caffeine
increases mitochondrial function and blocks melatonin signaling to
mitochondria in Alzheimer’s mice and cells. Neuropharmacology 63
(8):1368–1379. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.08.018.
Endesfelder, S., U. Weichelt, E. Strauß, A. Schl€or, M. Sifringer, T.
Scheuer, C. B€uhrer, and T. Schmitz. 2017. Neuroprotection by
caffeine in hyperoxia-induced neonatal brain injury. International
Journal of Molecular Sciences 18 (1):187. 10.3390/ijms18010187.
Endesfelder, S., I. 2. Zaak, U. Weichelt, C. B€uhrer, and T. Schmitz.
2014. Caffeine protects neuronal cells against injury caused by
hyperoxia in the immature brain. Free Radical Biology and Medicine
67:221–234. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.09.026.
Farah, A., T. de Paulis, D. P. Moreira, L. C. Trugo, and P. R. Martin.
2006a. Chlorogenic acids and lactones in regular and water-decaffei-
nated arabica coffees. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54
(2):374–381. doi:10.1021/jf0518305.
Farah, A., T. de Paulis, L. C. Trugo, and P. R. Martin. 2005. Effect of
roasting on the formation of chlorogenic acid lactones in coffee.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53 (5):1505–1513. doi:
10.1021/jf048701t.
Farah, A., M. C. Monteiro, V. Calado, A. S. Franca, and L. C. Trugo.
2006b. Correlation between cup quality and chemical attributes of
Brazilian
coffee.
Food
Chemistry
98
(2):373–380.
doi:10.1016/
j.foodchem.2005.07.032.
Fazeli, W., S. Zappettini, S. L. Marguet, J. Grendel, M. Esclapez, C.
Bernard, and D. Isbrandt. 2017. Early-life exposure to caffeine
affects the construction and activity of cortical networks in mice.
Experimental
Neurology
295:88–103.
doi:10.1016/
j.expneurol.2017.05.013.
Fazili, N. A., and A. Naeem. 2015. Anti-fibrillation potency of caffeic
acid against an antidepressant induced fibrillogenesis of human
a-synuclein: Implications for Parkinson’s disease. Biochimie 108:
178–185. doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2014.11.011.
Fernandez-Due~nas, V., M. Gomez-Soler, M. Lopez-Cano, J. J. Taura, C.
Ledent, M. Watanabe, K. A. Jacobson, J. P. Vilardaga, and F.
Ciruela. 2014. Uncovering caffeine’s adenosine A2A receptor inverse
agonism in experimental parkinsonism. ACS Chemical Biology 9
(11):2496–2501. doi:10.1021/cb5005383.
Fernandez-Gomez, B., M. Ullate, G. Picariello, P. Ferranti, M. D. Mesa,
and M. D. del Castillo. 2015. New knowledge on the antiglycoxida-
tive mechanism of chlorogenic acid. Food & Function 6 (6):
2081–2090. doi:10.1039/c5fo00194c.
Flaten, V., C. Laurent, J. E. Coelho, U. Sandau, V. L. Batalha, S.
Burnouf, M. Hamdane, S. Humez, D. Boison, L. V. Lopes, et al.
2014. From epidemiology to pathophysiology: What about caffeine
in Alzheimer’s disease? Biochemical Society Transactions 42 (2):
587–592. doi:10.1042/BST20130229.
Fogliano, V., and F. J. Morales. 2011. Estimation of dietary intake of
melanoidins from coffee and bread. Food & Function 2 (2):117–123.
doi:10.1039/c0fo00156b.
Fondell, E., E. J. O’Reilly, K. C. Fitzgerald, G. J. Falcone, L. N. Kolonel,
Y. Park, S. M. Gapstur, and A. Ascherio. 2015. Intakes of caffeine,
coffee and tea and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Results from
five
cohort
studies.
Amyotrophic
Lateral
Sclerosis
and
Frontotemporal
Degeneration
16
(5-6):366–371.
doi:10.3109/
21678421.2015.1020813.
Fontaine, S. N., J. J. Sabbagh, J. Baker, C. R. Martinez-Licha, A.
Darling, and C. A. Dickey. 2015. Cellular factors modulating the
mechanism of tau protein aggregation. Cellular and Molecular Life
Sciences 72 (10):1863–1879. doi:10.1007/s00018-015-1839-9.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
2018. Coffee. Accessed May 23, 2018. http://www.fao.org/docrep/
006/y5143e/y5143e0v.htm.
Frazier, H. N., S. Maimaiti, K. L. Anderson, L. D. Brewer, J. C. Gant,
N. M. Porter, and O. Thibault. 2017. Calcium’s role as nuanced
modulator of cellular physiology in the brain. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications 483 (4):981–987. doi:10.1016/
j.bbrc.2016.08.105.
Frazzini, V., S. Guarnieri, M. Bomba, R. Navarra, C. Morabito, M. A.
Mariggio, and S. L. Sensi. 2016. Altered Kv2.1 functioning promotes
increased excitability in hippocampal neurons of an Alzheimer’s dis-
ease mouse model. Cell Death & Disease 7 (2):e2100. 10.1038/
cddis.2016.18.
Fu, Y., Y. Mu, H. Lei, P. Wang, X. Li, Q. Leng, L. Han, X. Qu, Z.
Wang, and X. Huang. 2016. Design, synthesis and evaluation of
novel
Tacrine-Ferulic
acid
hybrids
as
multifunctional
drug
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
15

candidates against Alzheimer’s disease. Molecules 21 (10):1338.
10.3390/molecules21101338.
Ghoneim, F. M., H. A. Khalaf, A. Z. Elsamanoudy, S. M. Abo El-Khair,
A.
M.
Helaly,
el-HM.
Mahmoud,
and
S.
H.
Elshafey.
2015.
Protective effect of chronic caffeine intake on gene expression of
brain derived neurotrophic factor signaling and the immunoreactiv-
ity of glial fibrillary acidic protein and Ki-67 in Alzheimer’s disease.
International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Pathology 8 (7):
7710–7728.
G€okcen, B. B., and N. S¸anlier. 2017. Coffee consumption and disease
correlations. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 30:1–13.
doi:10.1080/10408398.2017.1369391.
Gomez-Ruiz, J. A., D. S. Leake, and J. M. Ames. 2007. In vitro antioxi-
dant activity of coffee compounds and their metabolites. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55 (17):6962–6969. doi:10.1021/
jf0710985.
Gonc¸alves, N., A. T. Sim~oes, R. A. Cunha, and L. P. de Almeida. 2013.
Caffeine and adenosine A(2A) receptor inactivation decrease striatal
neuropathology in a lentiviral-based model of Machado-Joseph dis-
ease. Annals of Neurology 73 (5):655–666. doi:10.1002/ana.23866.
Grosso, G., A. Micek, S. Castellano, A. Pajak, and F. Galvano. 2016.
Coffee, tea, caffeine and risk of depression: A systematic review and
dose-response
meta-analysis of
observational studies. Molecular
Nutrition
&
Food
Research
60
(1):223–234.
doi:10.1002/
mnfr.201500620.
Gul, Z., C. Demircan, D. Bagdas, and R. L. Buyukuysal. 2016.
Protective effects of chlorogenic acid and its metabolites on hydro-
gen Peroxide-Induced alterations in rat brain slices: A comparative
study with resveratrol. Neurochemical Research 41 (8):2075–2085.
doi:10.1007/s11064-016-1919-8.
Hall, S., B. Desbrow, S. Anoopkumar-Dukie, A. K. Davey, D. Arora, C.
McDermott, M. M. Schubert, A. V. Perkins, M. J. Kiefel, and G. D.
Grant. 2015. A review of the bioactivity of coffee, caffeine and key
coffee constituents on inflammatory responses linked to depression.
Food
Research
International
76
(Pt
3):626–636.
doi:10.1016/
j.foodres.2015.07.027.
Hamaguchi, T., K. Ono, A. Murase, and M. Yamada. 2009. Phenolic
compounds prevent Alzheimer’s pathology through different effects
on the amyloid-beta aggregation pathway. The American Journal of
Pathology 175 (6):2557–2565. doi:10.2353/ajpath.2009.090417.
Hamza, T. H., H. Chen, E. M. Hill-Burns, S. L. Rhodes, J. Montimurro,
D. M. Kay, A. Tenesa, V. I. Kusel, P. Sheehan, M. Eaaswarkhanth,
et al. 2011. Genome-wide gene-environment study identifies glutam-
ate receptor gene GRIN2A as a Parkinson’s disease modifier gene
via interaction with coffee. PLoS Genetics 7 (8):e1002237. 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1002237.
Hecimovic, I., A. Belscak-Cvitanovic, D. Horzic, and D. Komes. 2011.
Comparative study of polyphenols and caffeine in different coffee
varieties affected by the degree of roasting. Food Chemistry 129 (3):
991–1000. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.05.059.
Hedstr€om, A. K., E. M. Mowry, M. A. Gianfrancesco, X. Shao, C. A.
Schaefer, L. Shen, T. Olsson, L. F. Barcellos, and L. Alfredsson.
2016. High consumption of coffee is associated with decreased mul-
tiple sclerosis risk; results from two independent studies. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 87 (5):454–460. doi:10.1136/
jnnp-2015-312176.
Hellwig, M., R. Matthes, A. Peto, J. L€obner, and T. Henle. 2014. N-
e-fructosyllysine and N-e-carboxymethyllysine, but bot lysinoalanine,
are available for the absorption after simulated gastrointestinal
digestion. Amino Acids 46 (2):289–299. doi:10.1007/s00726-013-
1501-5.
Huang, S. M., H. C. Chuang, C. H. Wu, and G. C. Yen. 2008.
Cytoprotective effects of phenolic acids on methylglyoxal-induced
apoptosis in neuro-2A cells. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research
52 (8):940–949. doi:10.1002/mnfr.200700360.
Huang, Y., M. Jin, R. Pi, J. Zhang, M. Chen, Y. Ouyang, A. Liu, X.
Chao, P. Liu, J. Liu, et al. 2013. Protective effects of caffeic acid and
caffeic acid phenethyl ester against acrolein-induced neurotoxicity in
HT22 mouse hippocampal cells. Neuroscience Letters 535:146–151.
doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2012.12.051.
Iozzi, D., R. Schubert, V. U. Kalenchuk, A. Neri, G. Sgaragli, F. Fusi,
and S. Saponara. 2013. Quercetin relaxes rat tail main artery partly
via
a
PKG-mediated
stimulation
of
KCa
1.1
channels.
Acta
Physiologica 208 (4):329–339. doi:10.1111/apha.12083.
Ito, H., X. L. Sun, M. Watanabe, M. Okamoto, and T. Hatano. 2008.
Chlorogenic acid and its metabolite m-coumaric acid evoke neurite
outgrowth in hippocampal neuronal cells. Bioscience, Biotechnology,
and Biochemistry 72 (3):885–888. doi:10.1271/bbb.70670.
Jagota, S., and J. Rajadas. 2012. Effect of phenolic compounds against
Ab aggregation and Ab-induced toxicity in transgenic C. elegans.
Neurochemical Research 37 (1):40–48. doi:10.1007/s11064-011-0580-
5.
Jaiswal, R., M. F. Matei, A. Golon, M. Witt, and N. Kuhnert. 2012.
Understanding the fate of chlorogenic acids in coffee roasting using
mass spectrometry based targeted and non-targeted analytical strat-
egies. Food & Function 3 (9):976–984. doi:10.1039/c2fo10260a.
Jang, S. A., D. W. Park, J. E. Kwon, H. S. Song, B. Park, H. Jeon, E. H.
Sohn, H. J. Koo, and S. C. Kang. 2017. Quinic acid inhibits vascular
inflammation in TNF-a-stimulated vascular smooth muscle cells.
Biomed Pharmacother 96:563–571. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.021.
Jasiewicz, B., A. Sierakowska, N. Wandyszewska, B. War_zajtis, U.
Rychlewska,
R.
Wawrzyniak,
and
L.
Mrowczynska.
2016.
Antioxidant properties of thio-caffeine derivatives: Identification of
the newly synthesized 8-[(pyrrolidin-1-ylcarbonothioyl)sulfanyl]caf-
feine
as
antioxidant
and
highly
potent
cytoprotective
agent.
Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters 26 (16):3994–3998. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.06.091.
Jeszka-Skowron,
M.,
E.
Stanisz,
and
M.
Paz
De
Pe~na.
2016.
Relationship between antioxidant capacity, chlorogenic acids and
elemental composition of green coffee. LWT - Food Science and
Technology 73:243–250. doi:10.1016/j.lwt.2016.06.018.
Jiang, W., T. Luo, S. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Y. Shen, F. He, J. Xu, and H. Q.
Wang. 2016. Quercetin protects against okadaic acid-induced injury
via MAPK and PI3K/Akt/GSK3b signaling pathways in HT22 hip-
pocampal neurons. PLoS One 11 (4):e0152371. 10.1371/journal.-
pone.0152371. eCollection 2016.
Jimenez-Aliaga, K., P. Bermejo-Bescos, J. Benedı, and S. Martın-
Aragon. 2011. Quercetin and rutin exhibit antiamyloidogenic and
fibril-disaggregating effects in vitro and potent antioxidant activity
in APPswe cells. Life Sciences 89 (25–26):939–945. doi:10.1016/
j.lfs.2011.09.023.
Jin, R., G. Yang, and G. Li. 2010. Molecular insights and therapeutic
targets for blood-brain barrier disruption in ischemic stroke: Critical
role of matrix metalloproteinases and tissue-type plasminogen acti-
vator.
Neurobiology
of
Disease
38
(3):376–385.
doi:10.1016/
j.nbd.2010.03.008.
Kachroo, A., and M. A. Schwarzschild. 2012. Adenosine A2A receptor
gene disruption protects in an a-synuclein model of Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Annals of Neurology 71 (2):278–282. doi:10.1002/ana.22630.
Kalda, A., L. Yu, E. Oztas, and J. F. Chen. 2006. Novel neuroprotection
by caffeine and adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists in animal
models of Parkinson’s disease. Journal of the Neurological Sciences
248 (1–2):9–15. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.003.
Kamiyama, M., J. K. Moon, H. W. Jang, and T. Shibamoto. 2015. Role
of degradation products of chlorogenic acid in the antioxidant activ-
ity of roasted coffee. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 63
(7):1996–2005. doi:10.1021/jf5060563.
Kang, C. H., R. G. Jayasooriy, M. G. Dilshara, Y. H. Choi, Y. K. Jeong,
N. D. Kim, and G. Y. Kim. 2012. Caffeine suppresses lipopolysac-
charide-stimulated BV2 microglial cells by suppressing akt-mediated
NF-jB activation and ERK phosphorylation. Food and Chemical
Toxicology 50 (12):4270–4276. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2012.08.041.
Kardani, J., and I. Roy. 2015. Understanding caffeine’s role in attenuat-
ing the toxicity of a-Synuclein aggregates: Implications for risk of
Parkinson’s disease. ACS Chemical Neuroscience 6 (9):1613–1625.
doi:10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00158.
Khan, K. A., N. Kumar, P. G. Nayak, M. Nampoothiri, R. R. Shenoy,
N. Krishnadas, C. M. Rao, and J. Mudgal. 2013a. Impact of caffeic
acid on aluminium chloride-induced dementia in rats. Journal of
16
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

Pharmacy
and
Pharmacology
65
(12):1745–1752.
doi:10.1111/
jphp.12126.
Khan, M. S., A. M. Al-Senaidy, M. Priyadarshini, A. Shah, and B.
Bano. 2013b. Different conformation of thiol protease inhibitor dur-
ing amyloid formation: Inhibition by curcumin and quercetin.
Journal of Fluorescence 23 (3):451–457. doi:10.1007/s10895-013-
1158-1.
Kim, H. S., J. Y. Cho, D. H. Kim, J. J. Yan, H. K. Lee, H. W. Suh, and
D. K. Song. 2004. Inhibitory effects of long-term administration of
ferulic acid on microglial activation induced by intracerebroventric-
ular injection of beta-amyloid peptide (1-42) in mice. Biological &
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 27 (1):120–121. doi:10.1248/bpb.27.120.
Kim, I. Y., E. J. O’Reilly, K. C. Hughes, X. Gao, M. A. Schwarzschild,
and A. Ascherio. 2017. Differences in Parkinson’s disease risk with
caffeine
intake
and
postmenopausal
hormone
use.
Journal
of
Parkinson’s Disease 7 (4):677–684. doi:10.3233/JPD-171175.
Kim, J., S. Lee, J. Shim, H. W. Kim, J. Kim, Y. J. Jang, H. Yang, J.
Park, S. H. Choi, J. H. Yoon, et al. 2012. Caffeinated coffee, decaffei-
nated coffee, and the phenolic phytochemical chlorogenic acid up-
regulate NQO1 expression and prevent H2O2-induced apoptosis in
primary cortical neurons. Neurochemistry International 60 (5):
466–474. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2012.02.004.
Kim, J. H., Q. Wang, J. M. Choi, S. Lee, and E. J. Cho. 2015. Protective
role of caffeic acid in an Ab25-35-induced Alzheimer’s disease
model. Nutrition Research and Practice 9 (5):480–488. doi:10.4162/
nrp.2015.9.5.480.
Kiyohara, C., M. Washio, T. Horiuchi, T. Asami, S. Ide, T. Atsumi, G.
Kobashi, H. Takahashi, Y. Tada, and Kyushu Sapporo SLE (KYSS)
Study Group. 2014. Modifying effect of N-acetyltransferase 2 geno-
type on the association between systemic lupus erythematosus and
consumption of alcohol and caffeine-rich beverages. Arthritis Care
& Research 66 (7):1048–1056. doi:10.1002/acr.22282.
Kolahdouzan, M., and M. J. Hamadeh. 2017. The neuroprotective
effects of caffeine in neurodegenerative diseases. CNS Neuroscience
& Therapeutics 23 (4):272–290. doi:10.1111/cns.12684.
Kucera, L., R. Papousek, O. Kurka, P. Bartak, and P. Bednar. 2016.
Study of composition of espresso coffee prepared from various roast
degrees of Coffea arabica L. coffee beans. Food Chemistry 199:
727–735. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.12.080.
Kulbe, J. R., and E. D. Hall. 2017. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy-
integration of canonical traumatic brain injury secondary injury
mechanisms with tau pathology. Progress in Neurobiology 158:15–44.
doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.08.003.
Kwak, S. C., C. Lee, J. Y. Kim, H. M. Oh, H. S. So, M. S. Lee, M. C.
Rho, and J. Oh. 2013. Chlorogenic acid inhibits osteoclast differenti-
ation and bone resorption by down-regulation of receptor activator
of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand-induced nuclear factor of activated
T cells c1 expression. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 36 (11):
1779–1786. doi.org/10.1248/bpb.b13-00430.
Kwon, S. H., H. K. Lee, J. A. Kim, S. I. Hong, H. C. Kim, T. H. Jo,
Y. I. Park, C. K. Lee, Y. B. Kim, S. Y. Lee, and C. G. Jang. 2010.
Neuroprotective effects of chlorogenic acid on scopolamine-induced
amnesia via anti-acetylcholinesterase and anti-oxidative activities in
mice. European Journal of Pharmacology 649 (1–3):210–217. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.001.
Ky, C. L., J. Louarn, S. Dussert, B. Guyot, S. Hamon, and M. Noirot.
2001. Caffeine, trigonelline, chlorogenic acids and sucrose diversity
in wild Coffea arabica L. and C. canephora P. accessions. Food
Chemistry 75 (2):223–230. doi:10.1016/S0308-8146(01)00204-7.
Lansbury, P. T., and H. A. Lashuel. 2006. A century-old debate on pro-
tein aggregation and neurodegeneration enters the clinic. Nature 443
(7113):774–779. doi:10.1038/nature05290.
Lardeau, A., and L. Poquet. 2013. Phenolic acid metabolites derived
from coffee consumption are unlikely to cross the blood-brain bar-
rier. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 76:134.
10.1016/j.jpba.2012.12.016.
Laurent, C., S. Eddarkaoui, M. Derisbourg, A. Leboucher, D. Demeyer,
S. Carrier, M. Schneider, M. Hamdane, C. E. M€uller, L. Buee, and
D. Blum. 2014. Beneficial effects of caffeine in a transgenic model of
Alzheimer’s disease-like tau pathology. Neurobiology of Aging 35 (9):
2079–2090. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.027.
Lee, K., B. J. Lee, and Y. Bu. 2015. Protective effects of dihydrocaffeic
acid, a coffee component metabolite, on a focal cerebral ischemia rat
model.
Molecules
20
(7):11930–11940.
doi:10.3390/
molecules200711930.
Lee, K. W., J. Y. Im, J. M. Woo, H. Grosso, Y. S. Kim, A. C. Cristovao,
P. K. Sonsalla, D. S. Schuster, M. M. Jalbut, J. R. Fernandez, et al.
2013. Neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties of a coffee
component
in
the
MPTP
model
of
Parkinson’s
disease.
Neurotherapeutics 10 (1):143–153. doi:10.1007/s13311-012-0165-2.
Lee, M., E. G. McGeer, and P. L. McGeer. 2016. Quercetin, not caf-
feine, is a major neuroprotective component in coffee. Neurobiology
of Aging 46:113–123. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.06.015.
Lee, Y. C., N. J. Nassikas, and D. J. Clauw. 2011. The role of the cen-
tral nervous system in the generation and maintenance of chronic
pain
in
rheumatoid
arthritis,
osteoarthritis
and
fibromyalgia.
Arthritis Research & Therapy 13 (2):211. 10.1186/ar3306.
Lee, Y. H., S.-C. Bae, and G. G. Song. 2014. Coffee or tea consumption
and the risk of rheumatoid arthritis: A meta-analysis. Clinical
Rheumatology 33 (11):1575–1583. doi:10.1007/s10067-014-2631-1.
Lenzi, J., A. F. Rodrigues, A. d. S. Ros, B. B. de Castro, D. D. de Lima,
D. D. D. Magro, and A. L. B. Zeni. 2015. Ferulic acid chronic treat-
ment exerts antidepressant-like effect: Role of antioxidant defense
system. Metabolic Brain Disease 30 (6):1453–1463. doi:10.1007/
s11011-015-9725-6.
Li, S., N. H. Geiger, M. L. Soliman, L. Hui, J. D. Geiger, and X. Chen.
2015a. Caffeine, through adenosine A3 receptor-mediated actions,
suppresses amyloid-b protein precursor internalization and amyloid-
b generation. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 47 (1):73–83. doi:
10.3233/JAD-142223.
Li, Y., S. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Sun, H. Hasimu, R. Liu, and T. Zhang. 2015b.
Quercetin protects human brain microvascular endothelial cells
from fibrillar b-amyloid 1-40-induced toxicity. Acta Pharmaceutica
Sinica B 5 (1):47–54. doi:10.1016/j.apsb.2014.12.003.
Li, Y. L., H. Guo, Y. Q. Zhao, A. F. Li, Y. Q. Ren, and J. W. Zhang.
2017. Quercetin protects neuronal cells from oxidative stress and
cognitive degradation induced by amyloid b-peptide treatment.
Molecular
Medicine
Reports
16
(2):1573–1577.
doi:10.3892/
mmr.2017.6704.
Liang, N., W. Xue, P. Kennepohl, and D. D. Kitts. 2016. Interactions
between major chlorogenic acid isomers and chemical changes in
coffee brew that affect antioxidant activities. Food Chemistry 213:
251–259. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.06.041.
Liu, F., X. W. Lu, Y. J. Zhang, L. Kou, N. Song, M. K. Wu, M. Wang,
H. Wang, and J. F. Shen. 2016a. Effects of chlorogenic acid on volt-
age-gated potassium channels of trigeminal ganglion neurons in an
inflammatory environment. Brain Research Bulletin 127:119–125.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.09.005.
Liu, Q. P., Y. F. Wu, H. Y. Cheng, T. Xia, H. Ding, H. Wang, Z. M.
Wang, and Y. Xu. 2016b. Habitual coffee consumption and risk of
cognitive decline/dementia: A systematic review and Meta-analysis
of prospective cohort studies. Nutrition 32 (6):628–636. doi:10.1016/
j.nut.2015.11.015.
Lopez-Froilan, R., E. Ramırez-Moreno, N. S. Podio, M. L. Perez-
Rodrıguez, M. Camara, M. V. Baroni, D. A. Wunderlin, and M. C.
Sanchez-Mata. 2016. In vitro assessment of potential intestinalab-
sorption of some phenolic families and carboxylic acids from com-
mercial instant coffee samples. Food & Function 7 (6):2706–2711.
doi:10.1039/c6fo00315j.
Lu, C. W., T. Lin, and S. J. Wang. 2013. Quercetin inhibits depolariza-
tion-evoked glutamate release in nerve terminals from rat cerebral
cortex. Neurotoxicology 39:1–9. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2013.07.009.
Ludwig, I. A., P. Mena, L. Calani, C. Cid, D. Del Rio, M. E. J. Lean,
and A. Crozier. 2014. Variations in caffeine and chlorogenic acid
contents of coffees: What are we drinking? Food & Function 5 (8):
1718–1726. doi:10.1039/c4fo00290c.
Maciel, R. M., F. B. Carvalho, A. A. Olabiyi, R. Schmatz, J. M.
Gutierres, N. Stefanello, D. Zanini, M. M. Rosa, C. M. Andrade,
M. A. Rubin, et al. 2016. Neuroprotective effects of quercetin on
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
17

memory and anxiogenic-like behavior in diabetic rats: Role of ecto-
nucleotidases
and
acetylcholinesterase
activities.
Biomedicine
&
Pharmacotherapy 84:559–568. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2016.09.069.
Madeira, M. H., R. Boia, A. F. Ambrosio, and A. R. Santiago. 2017.
Having a coffee break: The impact of caffeine consumption on
microglia-mediated
inflammation
in
neurodegenerative
diseases.
Mediators of Inflammation 2017:1. 10.1155/2017/4761081.
Mancha Agresti, P. D. C., A. S. Franca, L. S. Oliveira, and R. Augusti.
2008. Discrimination between defective and non-defective Brazilian
coffee beans by their volatile profile. Food Chemistry 106 (2):
787–796. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.06.019.
Martins, D. F., M. R. Prado, E. Daruge-Neto, A. P. Batisti, A. A. Emer,
L. Mazzardo-Martins, A. R. Santos, and A. P. Piovezan. 2015.
Caffeine prevents antihyperalgesic effect of gabapentin in an animal
model of CRPS-I: Evidence for the involvement of spinal adenosine
A1 receptor. Journal of the Peripheral Nervous System 20 (4):
403–409. doi:10.1111/jns.12149.
Massa, J., E. J. O’Reilly, K. L. Munger, and A. Ascherio. 2013. Caffeine
and alcohol intakes have no association with risk of multiple scler-
osis.
Multiple
Sclerosis
Journal
19
(1):53–58.
doi:10.1177/
1352458512448108.
Masuda, M., N. Suzuki, S. Taniguchi, T. Oikawa, T. Nonaka, T.
Iwatsubo, S. Hisanaga, M. Goedert, and M. Hasegawa. 2006. Small
molecule
inhibitors
of
alpha-synuclein
filament
assembly.
Biochemistry 45 (19):6085–6094. doi:10.1021/bi0600749.
Mikami, Y., and T. Yamazawa. 2015. Chlorogenic acid, a polyphenol in
coffee,
protects
neurons
against
glutamate
neurotoxicity.
Life
Sciences 139:69–74. doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2015.08.005.
Mills, C. E., M. J. Oruna-Concha, D. S. Mottram, G. R. Gibson, and
J. P. Spencer. 2013. The effect of processing on chlorogenic acid
content of commercially available coffee. Food Chemistry 141 (4):
3335–3340. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.06.014.
Mirza, S. S., H. Tiemeier, R. F. de Bruijn, A. Hofman, O. H. Franco, J.
Kiefte-de Jong, P. J. Koudstaal, and M. A. Ikram. 2014. Coffee con-
sumption and incident dementia. European Journal of Epidemiology
29 (10):735–741. doi:10.1007/s10654-014-9943-y.
Miyamae, Y., J. Han, K. Sasaki, M. Terakawa, H. Isoda, and H.
Shigemori. 2011. 3,4,5-tri-O-caffeoylquinic acid inhibits amyloid
b-mediated cellular toxicity on SH-SY5Y cells through the upregula-
tion of PGAM1 and G3PDH. Cytotechnology 63 (2):191–200. doi:
10.1007/s10616-011-9341-1.
Miyamae, Y., M. Kurisu, K. Murakami, J. Han, H. Isoda, K. Irie, and
H. Shigemori. 2012. Protective effects of caffeoylquinic acids on the
aggregation and neurotoxicity of the 42-residue amyloid b-protein.
Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry 20 (19):5844–5849. doi:10.1016/
j.bmc.2012.08.001.
Mohamed, T., W. Osman, G. Tin, and P. P. Rao. 2013. Selective inhib-
ition of human acetylcholinesterase by xanthine derivatives: In vitro
inhibition and molecular modeling investigations. Bioorganic &
Medicinal
Chemistry
Letters
23
(15):4336–4341.
doi:10.1016/
j.bmcl.2013.05.092.
Moon, J. H., J. H. Lee, J. Y. Park, S. W. Kim, Y. J. Lee, S. J. Kang,
J. W. Seol, D. C. Ahn, and S. Y. Park. 2014. Caffeine prevents
human prion protein-mediated neurotoxicity through the induction
of autophagy. International Journal of Molecular Medicine 34 (2):
553–558. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2014.1814.
Moosavi, F., R. Hosseini, H. Rajaian, T. Silva, E. Magalh~aes, D. Silva, L.
Saso, N. Edraki, R. Miri, F. Borges, and O. Firuzi. 2017. Derivatives
of caffeic acid, a natural antioxidant, as the basis for the discovery
of novel nonpeptidic neurotrophic agents. Bioorganic & Medicinal
Chemistry 25 (12):3235–3246. doi:10.1016/j.bmc.2017.04.026.
Morris, M., S. Maeda, K. Vossel, and L. Mucke. 2011. The many faces
of tau. Neuron 70 (3):410–426. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.009.
Mullen, W., B. Nemzer, A. Stalmach, S. Ali, and E. Combet. 2013.
Polyphenolic and hydroxycinnamate contents of whole coffee fruits
from China, India, and Mexico. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 61 (22):5298–5309. doi:10.1021/jf4003126.
Nakajima, Y., M. Shimazawa, S. Mishima, and H. Hara. 2007. Water
extract of propolis and its main constituents, caffeoylquinic acid
derivatives, exert neuroprotective effects via antioxidant actions. Life
Sciences 80 (4):370–377. doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2006.09.017.
Nakaso, K., S. Ito, and K. Nakashima. 2008. Caffeine activates the
PI3K/Akt
pathway
and
prevents
apoptotic
cell
death
in
a
Parkinson’s disease model of SH-SY5Y cells. Neuroscience Letters
432 (2):146–150. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2007.12.034.
Oboh, G., O. M. Agunloye, A. J. Akinyemi, A. O. Ademiluyi, and S. A.
Adefegha. 2013. Comparative study on the inhibitory effect of caffeic
and chlorogenic acids on key enzymes linked to Alzheimer’s disease
and some pro-oxidant induced oxidative stress in rats’ brain-in
vitro. Neurochemical Research 38 (2):413–419. doi:10.1007/s11064-
012-0935-6.
Oboh, G., O. B. Ogunsuyi, and O. E. Olonisola. 2017. Does caffeine
influence the anticholinesterase and antioxidant properties of done-
pezil? Evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies. Metabolic Brain
Disease 32 (2):629–639. doi:10.1007/s11011-017-9951-1.
Ojha, S., H. Javed, S. Azimullah, S. B. Abul Khair, and M. E. Haque.
2015. Neuroprotective potential of ferulic acid in the rotenone
model
of
Parkinson’s
disease.
Drug
Design,
Development
and
Therapy 9:5499–5510. doi:10.2147/DDDT.S90616.
Ono, K., M. Hirohata, and M. Yamada. 2005. Ferulic acid destabilizes
preformed beta-amyloid fibrils in vitro. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research
Communications
336
(2):444–449.
doi:10.1016/
j.bbrc.2005.08.148.
Ono, K., and M. Yamada. 2006. Antioxidant compounds have potent
anti-fibrillogenic and fibril-destabilizing effects for a-synuclein fibrils
in vitro. Journal of Neurochemistry 97 (1):105–115. doi:10.1111/
j.1471-4159.2006.03707.x.
Opitz, S. E., B. A. Goodman, M. Keller, S. Smrke, M. Wellinger, S.
Schenker, and C. Yeretzian. 2017. Understanding the effects of
roasting on antioxidant components of coffee brews by coupling on-
line ABTS assay to high performance size exclusion chromatog-
raphy. Phytochemical Analysis 28 (2):106–114. doi:10.1002/pca.2661.
Palacios, N., X. Gao, M. L. McCullough, M. A. Schwarzschild, R. Shah,
S. Gapstur, and A. Ascherio. 2012. Caffeine and risk of Parkinson’s
disease in a large cohort of men and women. Movement Disorders
27 (10):1276–1282. doi:10.1002/mds.25076.
Pan, W., K. Hu, P. Bai, L. Yu, Q. Ma, T. Li, X. Zhang, C. Chen, K.
Peng, W. Liu, and Z. Sang. 2016. Design, synthesis and evaluation
of novel ferulic acid-memoquin hybrids as potential multifunctional
agents for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Bioorganic &
Medicinal
Chemistry
Letters
26
(10):2539–2543.
doi:10.1016/
j.bmcl.2016.03.086.
Panza, F., V. Solfrizzi, M. R. Barulli, C. Bonfiglio, V. Guerra, A. Osella,
D. Seripa, C. Sabba, A. Pilotto, and G. Logroscino. 2015. Coffee, tea,
and caffeine consumption and prevention of late-life cognitive
decline and dementia: A systematic review. The Journal of Nutrition,
Health & Aging 19 (3):313–328. doi:10.1007/s12603-014-0563-8.
Park, J. B. 2013. Isolation and quantification of major chlorogenic acids
in three major instant coffee brands and their potential effects on
H2O2-induced mitochondrial membrane depolarization and apop-
tosis in PC-12 cells. Food & Function 4 (11):1632–1638. doi:10.1039/
c3fo60138b.
Patay, E. B., T. Bencsik, and N. Papp. 2016. Phytochemical overview
and medicinal importance of coffea species from the past until now.
Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Medicine 9 (12):1127–1135. doi:
10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.11.008.
Perluigi, M., G. Joshi, R. Sultana, V. Calabrese, C. De Marco, R.
Coccia, C. Cini, and D. A. Butterfield. 2006. In vivo protective
effects of ferulic acid ethyl ester against amyloid-beta peptide 1-42-
induced oxidative stress. Journal of Neuroscience Research 84 (2):
418–426. doi:10.1002/jnr.20879.
Pero, R., H. Lund, and T. Leanderson. 2009. Antioxidant metabolism
induced by quinic acid. Increased urinary excretion of tryptophan
and
nicotinamide.
Phytotherapy
Research
23
(3):335–346.
doi:
10.1002/ptr.2628.
Perrone, D., R. Donangelo, C. M. Donangelo, and A. Farah. 2010.
Modeling weight loss and chlorogenic acids content in coffee during
roasting. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 58 (23):
12238–12243. doi:10.1021/jf102110u.
18
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI

Pohanka, M., and P. Dobes. 2013. Caffeine inhibits acetylcholinesterase,
but not butyrylcholinesterase. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences 14 (5):9873–9882. doi:10.3390/ijms14059873.
Qosa, H., A. H. Abuznait, R. A. Hill, and A. Kaddoumi. 2012. Enhanced
brain amyloid-b clearance by rifampicin and caffeine as a possible
protective
mechanism
against
Alzheimer’s
disease.
Journal
of
Alzheimer’s Disease 31 (1):151–165. doi:10.3233/JAD-2012-120319.
Regitz, C., L. M. Dußling, and U. Wenzel. 2014. Amyloid-beta (Ab1-
42)-induced paralysis in Caenorhabditis elegans is inhibited by the
polyphenol quercetin through activation of protein degradation
pathways. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 58 (10):1931–1940.
doi:10.1002/mnfr.201400014.
Ross, C. A., and M. A. Poirier. 2004. Protein aggregation and neurode-
generative disease. Nature Medicine 10 Suppl:S10–S17. doi:10.1038/
nm1066.
Sabogal-Guaqueta, A. M., J. I. Mu~noz-Manco, J. R. Ramırez-Pineda, M.
Lamprea-Rodriguez, E. Osorio, and G. P. Cardona-Gomez. 2015.
The flavonoid quercetin ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease pathology
and protects cognitive and emotional function in aged triple trans-
genic Alzheimer’s disease model mice. Neuropharmacology 93:
134–145. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.01.027.
Sang, Z., W. Pan, K. Wang, Q. Ma, L. Yu, Y. Yang, P. Bai, C. Leng, Q.
Xu, X. Li, et al. 2017. Design, synthesis and evaluation of novel
ferulic acid-O-alkylamine derivatives as potential multifunctional
agents for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. European Journal of
Medicinal Chemistry 130:379–392. doi:10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.02.039.
Santos, C., J. Costa, J. Santos, A. Vaz-Carneiro, and N. Lunet. 2010.
Caffeine intake and dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20 Suppl 1:S187–S204. doi:10.3233/
JAD-2010-091387.
Selkoe,
D.
J.,
and
J.
Hardy.
2016.
The
amyloid
hypothesis
of
Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Molecular Medicine 8 (6):
595–608. doi:10.15252/emmm.201606210.
Sergeant, N., A. Bretteville, M. Hamdane, M. L. Caillet-Boudin, P.
Grognet, S. Bombois, D. Blum, A. Delacourte, F. Pasquier, E.
Vanmechelen, et al. 2008. Biochemistry of tau in Alzheimer’s disease
and related neurological disorders. Expert Review of Proteomics 5
(2):207–224. doi:10.1586/14789450.5.2.207.
Sgarbossa, A., D. Giacomazza, and M. di Carlo. 2015. Ferulic acid: A
hope for Alzheimer’s disease therapy from plants. Nutrients 7 (7):
5764–5782. doi:10.3390/nu7075246.
Sgarbossa, A., S. Monti, F. Lenci, E. Bramanti, R. Bizzarri, and V.
Barone. 2013. The effects of ferulic acid on b-amyloid fibrillar struc-
tures investigated through experimental and computational techni-
ques.
Biochimica
et
Biophysica
Acta
1830
(4):2924–2937.
doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.12.023.
Shamsi, A., A. Ahmed, and B. Bano. 2016. Glyoxal induced structural
transition of buffalo kidney cystatin to molten globule and aggre-
gates: Anti-fibrillation potency of quinic acid. IUBMB Life 68 (2):
156–166. doi:10.1002/iub.1471.
Sharif, K., Watad, A. Bragazzi, N. L. Adaw, i Amital, M. H. Shoenfeld.
and Y. 2017. Coffee and autoimmunity: More than a mere hot bev-
erage!
Autoimmunity
Reviews
16
(7):712–721.
doi:10.1016/
j.autrev.2017.05.007.
Shen, W., R. Qi, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, C. Hu, Y. Zhao, M. Bie,
Y. Wang, Y. Fu, et al. 2012. Chlorogenic acid inhibits LPS-induced
microglial activation and improves survival of dopaminergic neu-
rons.
Brain
Research
Bulletin
88
(5):487–494.
doi:10.1016/
j.brainresbull.2012.04.010.
Shukitt-Hale, B., M. G. Miller, Y. F. Chu, B. J. Lyle, and J. A. Joseph.
2013. Coffee, but not caffeine, has positive effects on cognition and
psychomotor behavior in aging. Age (Dordr) 35 (6):2183–2192. doi:
10.1007/s11357-012-9509-4.
Silva, C. G., C. Metin, W. Fazeli, N. J. Machado, S. Darmopil, P. S.
Launay, A. Ghestem, M. P. Nesa, E. Bassot, E. Szabo, et al. 2013.
Adenosine receptor antagonists including caffeine alter fetal brain
development in mice. Science Translational Medicine 5 (197):
197ra104. 10.1126/scitranslmed.3006258.
Simon, D. K., C. Wu, B. C. Tilley, K. Lohmann, C. Klein, H. Payami,
A. M. Wills, M. J. Aminoff, J. Bainbridge, R. Dewey, et al. 2017.
Caffeine, creatine, GRIN2A and Parkinson’s disease progression.
Journal
of
the
Neurological
Sciences
375:355–359.
doi:10.1016/
j.jns.2017.02.032.
Simonin, C., C. Duru, J. Salleron, P. Hincker, P. Charles, A. Delval, K.
Youssov, S. Burnouf, J. P. Azulay, C. Verny, et al. 2013. Association
between caffeine intake and age at onset in Huntington’s disease.
Neurobiology of Disease 58:179–182. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2013.05.013.
Smith, I. F., B. Hitt, K. N. Green, S. Oddo, and F. M. LaFerla. 2005.
Enhanced caffeine-induced Ca2þ release in the 3xTg-AD mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neurochemistry 94 (6):
1711–1718. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03332.x.
Soliman, M. L., J. D. Geiger, and X. Chen. 2017. Caffeine blocks HIV-1
tat-induced amyloid beta production and tau phosphorylation.
Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 12 (1):163–170. doi:10.1007/
s11481-016-9707-4.
Somporn, C., A. Kamtuo, P. Theerakulpisut, and S. Siriamornpun.
2011. Effects of roasting degree on radical scavenging activity, phe-
nolics and volatile compounds of arabica coffee beans (Coffea arab-
ica L. cv. Catimor). International Journal of Food Science &
Technology 46 (11):2287–2296. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2011.02748.x.
Souza, A. C., A. Souza, L. F. Medeiros, C. De Oliveira, V. L.
Scarabelot, R. S. Da Silva, M. R. Bogo, K. M. Capiotti, L. W. Kist,
C. D. Bonan, et al. 2015. Maternal caffeine exposure alters neuromo-
tor development and hippocampus acetylcholinesterase activity in
rat
offspring.
Brain
Research
1595:10–18.
doi:10.1016/
j.brainres.2014.10.039.
Spagnuolo, C., S. Moccia, and G. L. Russo. 2017. Anti-inflammatory
effects
of
flavonoids
in
neurodegenerative
disorders.
European
Journal
of
Medicinal
Chemistry
153:105–115.
doi:10.1016/
j.ejmech.2017.09.001.
Stalmach, A., W. Mullen, D. Barron, K. Uchida, T. Yokota, C. Cavin,
H. Steiling, G. Williamson, and A. Crozier. 2009. Metabolite profil-
ing of hydroxycinnamate derivatives in plasma and urine after the
ingestion of coffee by humans: Identification of biomarkers of coffee
consumption. Drug Metabolism and Disposition 37 (8):1749–1758.
doi:10.1124/dmd.109.028019.
Stephenson, J., E. Nutma, P. van der Valk, and S. Amor. 2018.
Inflammation in CNS neurodegenerative diseases. Immunology 154
(2):204–219. doi:10.1111/imm.12922.
Suganthy, N., K. P. Devi, S. F. Nabavi, N. Braidy, and S. M. Nabavi.
2016. Bioactive effects of quercetin in the central nervous system:
Focusing
on
the
mechanisms
of
actions.
Biomedicine
&
Pharmacotherapy 84:892–908. doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2016.10.011.
Sul, D., H. S. Kim, D. Lee, S. S. Joo, K. W. Hwang, and S. Y. Park.
2009. Protective effect of caffeic acid against beta-amyloid-induced
neurotoxicity by the inhibition of calcium influx and tau phosphor-
ylation. Life Sciences 84 (9–10):257–262. doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2008.12.001.
Sultana, R., A. Ravagna, H. Mohmmad-Abdul, V. Calabrese, and D. A.
Butterfield. 2005. Ferulic acid ethyl ester protects neurons against
amyloid beta-peptide(1-42)-induced oxidative stress and neurotox-
icity: Relationship to antioxidant activity. Journal of Neurochemistry
92 (4):749–758. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02899.x.
Szwajgier, D., K. Borowiec, and K. Pustelniak. 2017. The neuroprotec-
tive effects of phenolic acids: Molecular mechanism of action.
Nutrients 9 (5):E477. 10.3390/nu9050477.
Tagliazucchi, D., and A. Bellesia. 2015. The gastro-intestinal tract as
the major site of biological action of dietary melanoidins. Amino
Acids 47 (6):1077–1089. doi:10.1007/s00726-015-1951-z.
Tajes, M., A. Eraso-Pichot, F. Rubio-Moscardo, B. Guivernau, M.
Bosch-Morato,
V.
Valls-Comamala,
and
F.
J.
Mu~noz.
2014.
Methylglyoxal reduces mitochondrial potential and activates bax and
caspase-3
in
neurons:
Implications
for
Alzheimer’s
disease.
Neuroscience Letters 580:78–82. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2014.07.047.
Takahashi, R., K. Ono, Y. Takamura, M. Mizuguchi, T. Ikeda, H.
Nishijo, and M. Yamada. 2015. Phenolic compounds prevent the
oligomerization of a-synuclein and reduce synaptic toxicity. Journal
of Neurochemistry 134 (5):943–955. doi:10.1111/jnc.13180.
Taram, F., A. N. Winter, and D. A. Linseman. 2016. Neuroprotection
comparison of chlorogenic acid and its metabolites against mechan-
istically distinct cell death-inducing agents in cultured cerebellar
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
19

granule neurons. Brain Research 1648 (Pt A):69–80. doi:10.1016/
j.brainres.2016.07.028.
Teraoka, M., K. Nakaso, C. Kusumoto, S. Katano, N. Tajima, A.
Yamashita, T. Zushi, S. Ito, and T. Matsura. 2012. Cytoprotective
effect of chlorogenic acid against a-synuclein-related toxicity in cate-
cholaminergic PC12 cells. Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and
Nutrition 51 (2):122–127. doi:10.3164/jcbn.D-11-00030.
Trinh, K., L. Andrews, J. Krause, T. Hanak, D. Lee, M. Gelb, and L.
Pallanck. 2010. Decaffeinated coffee and nicotine-free tobacco pro-
vide neuroprotection in drosophila models of Parkinson’s disease
through
an
NRF2-dependent
mechanism.
The
Journal
of
Neuroscience
30
(16):5525–5532.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4777-
09.2010.
Tsai, C. F., Y. H. Kuo, W. L. Yeh, C. Y. Wu, H. Y. Lin, S. W. Lai, Y. S.
Liu, L. H. Wu, J. K. Lu, and D. Y. Lu. 2015. Regulatory effects of
caffeic acid phenethyl ester on neuroinflammation in microglial
cells. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 16 (12):5572–5589.
doi:10.3390/ijms16035572.
van Beers-Tas, M. H., S. A. Turk, and D. van Schaardenburg. 2015.
How does established rheumatoid arthritis develop, and are there
possibilities for prevention? Best Practice & Research: Clinical
Rheumatology 29 (4-5):527–542. doi:10.1016/j.berh.2015.09.001.
Van der Walt, M. M., G. Terre’Blanche, A. Petzer, A. C. U. Lourens,
and J. P. Petzer. 2013. The adenosine A(2A) antagonistic properties
of selected C8-substituted xanthines. Bioorganic Chemistry 49:49–58.
doi:10.1016/j.bioorg.2013.06.006.
Vicente, S. J., E. Y. Ishimoto, and E. A. Torres. 2014. Coffee modulates
transcription factor Nrf2 and highly increases the activity of antioxi-
dant enzymes in rats. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 62
(1):116–122. doi:10.1021/jf401777m.
Vignoli, J. A., D. G. Bassoli, and M. T. Benassi. 2011. Antioxidant
activity, polyphenols, caffeine and melanoidins in soluble coffee: The
influence of processing conditions and raw material. Food Chemistry
124 (3):863–868. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.07.008.
Wang, D. M., S. Q. Li, W. L. Wu, X. Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, and H. Y.
Yuan. 2014. Effects of long-term treatment with quercetin on cogni-
tion and mitochondrial function in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease.
Neurochemical
Research
39
(8):1533–1543.
doi:10.1007/
s11064-014-1343-x.
Wang, H.-Y., H. Qian, and W.-R. Yao. 2011. Melanoidins produced by
the
maillard
reaction:
Structure
and
biological
activity.
Food
Chemistry 128 (3):573–584. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.03.075.
Wang, X., X. Fan, S. Yuan, W. Jiao, B. Liu, J. Cao, and W. Jiang. 2017.
Chlorogenic acid protects against aluminium-induced cytotoxicity
through chelation and antioxidant actions in primary hippocampal
neuronal cells. Food & Function 8 (8):2924–2934. doi:10.1039/
c7fo00659d.
Wang, Y., W. Li, M. Wang, C. Lin, G. Li, X. Zhou, J. Luo, and D. Jin.
2018. Quercetin reduces neural tissue damage and promotes astro-
cyte activation after spinal cord injury in rats. Journal of Cellular
Biochemistry 119 (2):2298–2306. doi:10.1002/jcb.26392.
Wang, Y., Y. Wang, J. Li, L. Hua, B. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, Z. Zeng,
H. Bai, H. Yin, and J. Lou. 2016. Effects of caffeic acid on learning
deficits in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. International Journal of
Molecular Medicine 38 (3):869–875. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2016.2683.
Wei, M., L. Chen, J. Liu, J. Zhao, W. Liu, and F. Feng. 2016. Protective
effects of a chotosan fraction and its active components on b-amyl-
oid-induced neurotoxicity. Neuroscience Letters 617:143–149. doi:
10.1016/j.neulet.2016.w02.019.
Wierzejska, R. 2017. Can coffee consumption lower the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease? A literature review.
Archives
of
Medical
Science
13
(3):507–514.
doi:10.5114/
aoms.2016.63599.
Wirdefeldt, K., H. O. Adami, P. Cole, D. Trichopoulos, and J. Mandel.
2011. Epidemiology and etiology of Parkinson’s disease: A review of
the evidence. European Journal of Epidemiology 26 Suppl 1:S1–S58.
doi:10.1007/s10654-011-9581-6.
Wostyn, P., D. Van Dam, K. Audenaert, and P. P. De Deyn. 2011.
Increased cerebrospinal fluid production as a possible mechanism
underlying caffeine’s protective effect against Alzheimer’s disease.
International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 2011:617420. 10.4061/
2011/617420.
Wu, L., D. Sun, and Y. He. 2017. Coffee intake and the incident risk of
cognitive disorders: A dose-response Meta-analysis of nine prospect-
ive cohort studies. Clinical Nutrition 36 (3):730–736. doi:10.1016/
j.clnu.2016.05.015.
Wu, W., J. Shao, H. Lu, J. Xu, A. Zhu, W. Fang, and G. Hui. 2014.
Guard of delinquency? A role of microglia in inflammatory neuro-
degenerative diseases of the CNS. Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics
70 (1):1–8. doi:10.1007/s12013-014-9872-0.
Xu, K., D. G. Di Luca, M. Orru, Y. Xu, J. F. Chen, and M. A.
Schwarzschild. 2016a. Neuroprotection by caffeine in the MPTP model
of Parkinson’s disease and its dependence on adenosine A2A receptors.
Neuroscience 322:129–137. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.02.035.
Xu, Y., D. Lin, X. Yu, X. Xie, L. Wang, L. Lian, N. Fei, J. Chen, N.
Zhu, G. Wang, et al. 2016b. The antinociceptive effects of ferulic
acid on neuropathic pain: Involvement of descending monoaminer-
gic system and opioid receptors. Oncotarget 7 (15):20455–20468.
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.7973.
Yabe, T., H. Hirahara, N. Harada, N. Ito, T. Nagai, T. Sanagi, and H.
Yamada. 2010. Ferulic acid induces neural progenitor cell prolifer-
ation in vitro and in vivo. Neuroscience 165 (2):515–524. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.10.023.
Yan, J. J., J. Y. Cho, H. S. Kim, K. L. Kim, J. S. Jung, S. O. Huh, H. W.
Suh, Y. H. Kim, and D. K. Song. 2001. Protection against beta-amyl-
oid peptide toxicity in vivo with long-term administration of ferulic
acid. British Journal of Pharmacology 133 (1):89–96. doi:10.1038/
sj.bjp.0704047.
Yang, T., B. Kong, J. W. Gu, Y. Q. Kuang, L. Cheng, W. T. Yang, X.
Xia, and H. F. Shu. 2014. Anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative roles of
quercetin after traumatic brain injury. Cellular and Molecular
Neurobiology 34 (6):797–804. doi:10.1007/s10571-014-0070-9.
Yao, Y., D. D. Han, T. Zhang, and Z. Yang. 2010. Quercetin improves
cognitive deficits in rats with chronic cerebral ischemia and inhibits
voltage-dependent sodium channels in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal
neurons.
Phytotherapy
Research
24
(1):136–140.
doi:10.1002/
ptr.2902.
Yoshimura, T., M. Harashima, K. Kurogi, M. Suiko, M. C. Liu, and Y.
Sakakibara. 2016. A novel procedure for the assessment of the anti-
oxidant capacity of food components. Analytical Biochemistry 507:
7–12. doi:10.1016/j.ab.2016.05.002.
Zeitlin, R., S. Patel, S. Burgess, G. W. Arendash, and V. Echeverria.
2011. Caffeine induces beneficial changes in PKA signaling and JNK
and ERK activities in the striatum and cortex of Alzheimer’s trans-
genic
mice.
Brain
Research
1417:127–136.
doi:10.1016/
j.brainres.2011.08.036.
Zhang, Y. J., X. W. Lu, N. Song, L. Kou, M. K. Wu, F. Liu, H. Wang,
and J. F. Shen. 2014. Chlorogenic acid alters the voltage-gated potas-
sium channel currents of trigeminal ganglion neurons. International
Journal of Oral Science 6 (4):233–240. doi:10.1038/ijos.2014.58.
Zhang, L. F., Z. W. Zhou, Z. H. Wang, Y. H. Du, Z. X. He, C. Cao,
and S. F. Zhou. 2015. Coffee and caffeine potentiate the antiamyloi-
dogenic activity of melatonin via inhibition of Ab oligomerization
and modulation of the tau-mediated pathway in N2a/APP cells.
Drug Design, Development and Therapy 9:241–272. doi:10.2147/
DDDT.S71106.
Zhang, L. N., Y. J. Sun, S. Pan, J. X. Li, Y. E. Qu, Y. Li, Y. L. Wang,
and Z. B. Gao. 2013. Naþ-Kþ-ATPase, a potent neuroprotective
modulator
against
Alzheimer
disease.
Fundamental
&
Clinical
Pharmacology 27 (1):96–103. doi:10.1111/fcp.12000.
Zhao, Z. A., Y. Zhao, Y. L. Ning, N. Yang, Y. Peng, P. Li, X. Y. Chen,
D. Liu, H. Wang, X. Chen, et al. 2017. Adenosine A2A receptor
inactivation alleviates early-onset cognitive dysfunction after trau-
matic brain injury involving an inhibition of tau hyperphosphoryla-
tion. Translational Psychiatry 7 (5):e1123. 10.1038/tp.2017.98.
Zhu, M., S. Han, and A. L. Fink. 2013. Oxidized quercetin inhibits
a-synuclein fibrillization. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1830 (4):
2872–2881. doi:10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.12.027.
20
R. COLOMBO AND A. PAPETTI
