CDC’S NATIONAL CENTER FOR CHRONIC DISEASE PREVENTION AND HEALTH PROMOTION
More than 34 million Americans have diabetes. Another 88 million US 
adults have prediabetes, a serious health condition in which blood sugar 
levels are higher than normal, but not high enough yet to be diagnosed 
as type 2 diabetes. A person with prediabetes is at high risk of type 2 
diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. Diabetes also increases the risk of 
heart disease and stroke and can lead to other serious complications, such 
as kidney failure, blindness, and amputation of a toe, foot, or leg. 
People with diabetes spend more on health care, have fewer productive 
years, and miss more workdays compared to people who don’t have 
diabetes. In 2017, the total estimated cost of diagnosed diabetes was 
$327 billion, including $237 billion in direct medical costs and $90 billion 
in absenteeism, reduced productivity, and inability to work. 
Some people are at higher risk of type 2 diabetes because they:
•	 Are overweight or have obesity. 
•	 Are age 45 or older. 
•	 Have a parent, brother, or sister with type 2 diabetes. 
•	 Are physically active less than 3 times a week. 
•	 Had gestational diabetes (diabetes during pregnancy) or gave birth to 
a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds. 
•	 Are African American, Hispanic or Latino, American Indian, Alaska 
Native, Pacific Islander, or Asian American.
CDC’s Division of Diabetes Translation is at the leading edge of the nation’s 
efforts to end the devastation of diabetes. The division works with other 
federal agencies; state, local, and tribal health departments; health care 
providers; and community and faith organizations to identify people with 
prediabetes, prevent type 2 diabetes, prevent diabetes complications, and 
improve the health of all people with diabetes. These efforts have helped 
millions of Americans reduce their risk of type 2 diabetes and prevent or 
delay serious diabetes complications.
In the United States:
34.2 MILLION
88 MILLION
$327 BILLION
people are living with 
diabetes.
adults have 
prediabetes.
 is the annual 
estimated cost 
of diabetes.
Diabetes and Prediabetes
CDC works to prevent type 2 diabetes
and improve the health of all people with diabetes.

2    
Diabetes and Prediabetes
The Nation’s Risk Factors and CDC’s Response
Some risk factors for type 2 diabetes can’t be modified, such as age and 
family history, but some can, such as having prediabetes, being overweight, 
eating unhealthy food, being inactive, and smoking. CDC works to help 
people reduce those modifiable risk factors so they can prevent or delay 
developing type 2 diabetes and improve their overall health.
Prediabetes
RISK FACTOR
Prediabetes is a serious health condition in which blood sugar levels are 
higher than normal, but not high enough yet to be diagnosed as type 2 
diabetes. A person with prediabetes is at high risk of type 2 diabetes, 
heart disease, and stroke. Of US adults, 88 million—more than 1 in 3—
have prediabetes, and more than 8 in 10 of them don’t know they have it.
CDC’S RESPONSE
CDC’s National Diabetes Prevention Program (National DPP) is a public-
private partnership working to build a nationwide system to deliver an 
affordable, evidence-based lifestyle change program proven to prevent 
or delay type 2 diabetes. Participants in the program learn to make 
healthy food choices, be more physically active, and find ways to cope 
with problems and stress. These lifestyle changes can cut their risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes by as much as 58% (71% for those 60 or older).
In April 2018, the lifestyle change program became a covered service for 
Medicare beneficiaries with prediabetes. This is the first preventive service 
model from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation that has been 
expanded into the Medicare program—a landmark for public health.
CDC funds all 50 states, the District of Columbia, national organizations, 
and several large city health departments to:
•	 Improve awareness of prediabetes among health care providers and 
people at risk.
•	 Increase access to and enrollment in the National DPP lifestyle change 
program.
•	 Increase coverage for the lifestyle change program among public and 
private payers and employers.
•	 Improve screening and testing for prediabetes and refer people who 
are eligible to the lifestyle change program. 
In 2016, CDC partnered with the American Diabetes Association, the 
American Medical Association, and the Ad Council to launch the first 
national prediabetes awareness campaign. The ongoing campaign’s 
humorous public service announcements encourage millions of people to 
find out their risk by taking a 1-minute test at DoIHavePrediabetes.org. 

3    
Diabetes and Prediabetes
People at high risk are urged to ask their doctor for a simple blood test to 
confirm their results. The campaign website also provides links to sites 
nationwide that deliver the National DPP lifestyle change program. 
People who are overweight or have obesity are at increased risk of type 2 
diabetes. In the United States, 72% of adults are overweight or have obesity. 
Although incidence has decreased in recent years, the number of adults 
with diagnosed diabetes has nearly doubled in the last 2 decades as the 
US population has increased, aged, and become more overweight.
Not getting enough physical activity can raise the risk of type 2 diabetes. 
That’s because physical activity helps control blood sugar, weight, and 
blood pressure, as well as raise “good” cholesterol and lower “bad” 
cholesterol. It can also help people with diabetes prevent heart and blood 
flow problems, reducing the risk of heart disease and nerve damage, 
which are serious complications of diabetes. However, only 1 in 4 US 
adults and 1 in 5 high school students get enough physical activity.
CDC’S RESPONSE
CDC’s Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity develops and 
shares evidence-based approaches that help make healthy living easier for 
everyone, which can help people reduce their risk of type 2 diabetes. For 
example, the division works with hospitals to support breastfeeding mothers, 
child care centers to promote healthy eating standards, and workplaces to 
change policies so that employees have more healthy food choices. 
To increase physical activity opportunities, the division partners with state 
and local governments to promote improvements in community design, 
such as sidewalks and parks, that make physical activity safer and more 
convenient for people of all ages and abilities.
The risk of developing type 2 diabetes is 30% to 40% higher for current 
smokers than nonsmokers. Evidence shows that smoking is associated 
with increased belly fat, a known risk factor for type 2 diabetes. The 
more cigarettes a person smokes, the higher their risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes. People with diabetes who smoke are more likely than 
nonsmokers to have trouble managing their blood sugar.
People with diabetes who smoke also have higher risks of serious 
complications, such as heart disease, kidney disease, and poor blood flow 
in the legs and feet that can lead to infections, ulcers, and amputations. 
Other complications include retinopathy (eye disease that can cause 
Overweight and Lack of Physical Activity
RISK FACTOR
Smoking
RISK FACTOR

4    
Diabetes and Prediabetes
blindness) and peripheral neuropathy (nerve damage in the arms and legs 
that causes numbness, pain, weakness, and poor coordination). 
About 34 million US adults smoke cigarettes, and 58 million nonsmokers 
are exposed to secondhand smoke.
CDC’S RESPONSE
CDC’s Office on Smoking and Health is at the forefront of the nation’s efforts 
to reduce deaths and prevent chronic diseases that result from smoking, 
including type 2 diabetes. CDC and its partners promote efforts to prevent 
young people from starting to smoke, create smoke-free worksites and 
public spaces, help smokers quit, and reduce health disparities for groups 
with higher rates of chronic diseases caused by smoking.
Since 2012, CDC has been educating the public about the consequences of 
smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke and encouraging smokers 
to quit through its Tips From Former Smokers® (Tips®) education campaign. 
The Tips campaign features real people—not actors—who are living with 
serious health conditions caused by smoking and secondhand smoke 
exposure. It connects smokers with resources to help them quit, including 
a free national quitline (1-800-QUIT-NOW). 
Diabetes Complications and CDC’s Response
CDC strives to safeguard the health and improve the quality of life of all 
people with diabetes. Central to that effort is helping them prevent or 
reduce the severity of diabetes complications, including heart disease (the 
leading cause of early death among people with diabetes), kidney disease, 
blindness, and nerve damage that can lead to lower-limb amputations.
Diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES) services 
help people meet the challenges of self-care by providing them with the 
knowledge and skills to deal with daily diabetes management: eating 
healthy food, being active, checking their blood sugar, and managing stress. 
These programs have been shown to reduce A1C levels (average blood 
sugar over the last 2 to 3 months), reduce the onset and severity of diabetes 
complications, improve quality of life, and lower health care costs.
Diabetes is about 17% more prevalent in rural areas than urban ones, but 
62% of rural counties do not have DSMES services. The use of telehealth 
(delivery of the program by phone, Internet, or videoconference) may 
allow more patients in rural areas to benefit from DSMES and the 
National DPP lifestyle change program. CDC funds state and local health 
departments to improve access to, participation in, and health benefit 
coverage for DSMES, with emphasis on programs that achieve Association 
of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists (formerly the American 
Association of Diabetes Educators) accreditation or American Diabetes 
Association recognition. These programs meet national quality standards 
and may be more sustainable because of reimbursement eligibility.
