Accepted Manuscript
Comparative evaluation of the volatile profiles and taste properties of roasted
coffee beans as affected by drying method and detected by electronic nose,
electronic tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS
Wenjiang Dong, Rongsuo Hu, Yuzhou Long, Hehe Li, Yanjun Zhang, Kexue
Zhu, Zhong Chu
PII:
S0308-8146(18)31470-5
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.08.068
Reference:
FOCH 23409
To appear in:
Food Chemistry
Received Date:
7 June 2018
Revised Date:
16 August 2018
Accepted Date:
16 August 2018
Please cite this article as: Dong, W., Hu, R., Long, Y., Li, H., Zhang, Y., Zhu, K., Chu, Z., Comparative evaluation
of the volatile profiles and taste properties of roasted coffee beans as affected by drying method and detected by
electronic nose, electronic tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS, Food Chemistry (2018), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodchem.2018.08.068
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

  
 
1 
Comparative evaluation of the volatile profiles and taste properties of 
roasted coffee beans as affected by drying method and detected by 
electronic nose, electronic tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS 
 
Wenjiang Donga, Rongsuo Hua, Yuzhou Longa,*, Hehe Lib,**, Yanjun Zhanga, Kexue Zhua, Zhong Chua 
a Spice and Beverage Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences (CATAS), 
Wanning, Hainan 571533, China 
b Beijing Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing 100048, 
China 
 
__________________ 
* Corresponding author. Spice and Beverage Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural 
Sciences, Wanning 571533, China. 
** Corresponding author. Beijing Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Technology and Business 
University, Beijing 100048, China. 
E-mail addresses: dongwenjiang.123@163.com (W. Dong), longyuzhou6090@126.com (Y. Long), 
xyzhehe@126.com (H. Li). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
2 
ABSTRACT 
In this study, room-temperature drying, solar drying, heat pump drying (HPD), hot-air drying, and freeze 
drying were applied to investigate the volatile profiles and taste properties of roasted coffee beans by using 
electronic nose, electronic tongue, and headspace solid-phase microextraction gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (HS-SPME-GC-MS). Results indicated that the drying process markedly affected pH, total 
titratable acidity, total solids, and total soluble solids. Significant differences existed among all samples based 
on drying method; and the HPD method was superior for preserving ketones, phenols, and esters. Principal 
component analysis (PCA) combined with E-nose and E-tongue radar charts as well as the fingerprint of 
HS-SPME-GC-MS could clearly discriminate samples from different drying methods, with results obtained 
from hierarchical cluster analysis (the Euclidean distance is 0.75) being in agreement with those of PCA. 
These findings may provide a theoretical basis for the dehydration of coffee beans and other similar 
thermo-sensitive agricultural products. 
 
Keywords: Drying techniques, Roasted coffee beans, Electronic nose, Electronic tongue, HS-SPME-GC-MS 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
3 
1. Introduction 
In recent decades, with the development of the economy, social and cultural awareness, and an increase 
in standards of living, consumers have exhibited increased interest in healthy and well-flavoured foods and 
have begun to search for diets with health-promoting properties as well as those reducing potential disease 
risk. Beverages comprise an important component of the daily diet, with coffee being a very popular brewed 
beverage that is consumed worldwide; moreover, global coffee consumption has also increased at an 
average annual rate of 1.9% over the past 50 years. Coffee, which is characterised by a pleasant taste 
sensation comprising a balanced combination of bitterness, sourness, nuttiness, and astringency, is derived 
from a tropical evergreen shrub of the genus Coffea, which includes the two most common cultivated species, 
Coffea canephora and Coffea arabica (Cheng, Furtado, Smyth, & Henry, 2016). In China, coffee is mainly 
distributed in Hainan and Yunnan provinces; robusta coffee, recognised by its appearance and earthy flavour, 
is cultivated in Hainan province and Arabica coffee, having the characteristics of sweet-caramel aroma and 
meta-acid, is cultivated in Yunnan province (Dong, Tan, Zhao, Hu, & Lu, 2015). However, fresh coffee fruits 
are susceptible to postharvest pathogens and deterioration, including browning, softening, and rotting owing 
to inherent enzymes, if processing is not performed in a timely manner, which severely influences the 
composition of coffee beans and reduces their commercial value. Drying represents one of the most effective 
procedures to address this issue and has promoted the development of a highly efficient coffee industry. 
Therefore, it is necessary to explore the effect of drying techniques on the sensory quality of roasted coffee 
beans, as the biochemical composition of green coffee beans is decisive for flavour quality through 
roasting-induced chemical reactions. 
Drying technology, as an effective method to remove water from foods and to reduce water activity, plays 
an important role in the fields of food manufacturing and food processing worldwide. Nevertheless, drying can 
affect the major quality parameters associated with dried food products, such as colour, flavour, microbial 
load, texture, taste, aroma, and nutritional properties (Zhang et al., 2017). As volatile compounds are 
associated with coffee flavour and consequently impact its acceptance, the aroma component of flavour for 
coffee is regarded as especially important and contributes to flavour diversity, whereas drying could lead to 
the change of volatile profile and the formation of novel characteristic flavours. Studies conducted to 
investigate the volatile compounds in roasted coffee beans (Toledo, Pezza, Pezza, & Toci, 2016) have 
identified more than 800 volatile compounds, although previous studies have revealed that only about 20–30 
volatile compounds, including sulfur compounds, aldehydes, ketones, furans, pyrroles, and pyrazines, are 
predominantly responsible for the coffee aroma. Notably, although some volatiles have low odour thresholds 
and concentration, they could lead to a greater olfactory contribution to coffee flavour (Yang et al., 2016). 

  
 
4 
Several prior studies have examined the effect of drying procedures utilising solar drying, thin layer 
drying, hot air drying (HAD), freeze drying (FD), and fluidised drying on the quality of coffee beans and related 
products. Burmester and Eggers (2010) reported that the heat and mass transfer of the coffee drying process, 
along with optimisation of the industrial application transport coefficients and coffee properties, thermal 
conductivities, and effective diffusion coefficients were a function of the moisture content as well as the 
volume and densities of the coffee beans. Nilnot, et al. (2012) demonstrated that a mathematical model could 
accurately simulate the moisture contents in different components of parchment coffee and effectively explain 
transport processes. Suzihaque and Driscoll (2016) studied the effects of solar radiation, buoyancy of air flow, 
and optimisation of coffee drying in a heat recovery dryer, from which a sensitivity analysis of the profit 
equation showed that the tray area, coffee bean density, and the price of labour had the most effect on profit. 
Additionally, Burmester, Fehr, and Egger (2011) examined the thermophysical material properties of an 
innovative coffee drying process. In our previous study, different drying techniques; i.e. room temperature 
drying (RTD), solar drying (SD), heat pump drying (HPD), HAD, and FD were applied to investigate the effect 
on bioactive components, fatty acid composition, and volatile profile of green coffee beans (Dong, et al., 
2017). Considering the drying efficiency, good quality retention, and production cost, HPD exhibited the 
broadest market prospect for potential application (Dong, et al., 2017). In particular, drying was considered to 
constitute a key factor contributing to a high-quality coffee. However, to the best of our knowledge, no study 
has reported on the comparative evaluation of the profiles of volatile compounds of roasted coffee beans 
originated from different drying techniques. 
Over the past few years, gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy (GC-MS), electronic nose (E-nose), 
and electronic tongue (E-tongue) have been increasingly applied in the food industry for quality control (Peris 
& Escuder-Gilabert, 2016; Huang, Guo, Yuan, Luo, & Yue, 2015). In particular, solid-phase microextraction 
(SPME) represents an especially promising sample preparation technique in food analysis for the 
pre-processing procedures of GC-MS, which could provide an accurate approach for the analysis of type and 
concentration of volatile components, as well as serving as a useful sensorial tool for food flavour analysis. 
E-nose and E-tongue are analytical devices consisting of an array of sensors utilised to detect odorants and 
tastants. Recently, HS-SPME-GC-MS, E-nose, and E-tongue were applied to analyse the volatile and taste 
compounds of food matrices for, e.g., quality control, fresh grading, storage conditions, and authentication 
and differentiation, of foods, such as vegetables, fruits, tea and coffee, milk, wine, fish, and meat (Rosa, 
Leone, Cheli, & Chiofalo, 2017; Shampur, Yazdanfar, & Ghambarian, 2016). Moreover, in our previous work 
we found that in the application of E-nose and E-tongue sensors combined with chemometric multivariate 
analysis to discriminate seven robusta coffee cultivars, an acceptable performance of a calibration model 

  
 
5 
could be obtained (Dong, Zhao, Hu, Dong, & Tan, 2017). Nevertheless, these technologies have yet to be 
applied to assess the differences between roasted coffee bean samples prepared using different drying 
processes. 
Here, we hypothesise that different traditional drying processes differentially impact the volatile profile 
and taste properties of roasted coffee beans, and that these differences can be effectively detected through 
the use of statistical modelling of the data obtained from the newly-developed measurement technologies. 
The objective of the present study was therefore to evaluate and compare the odour compounds, aromatic 
profile, and taste properties of roasted coffee beans prepared from different drying processing methods (RTD, 
SD, HPD, HAD, and FD). HS-SPME-GC-MS, E-nose, and E-tongue techniques were then utilised to analyse 
the flavour of coffee samples, and principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) 
were applied on the data matrix obtained by HS-SPME-GC-MS, E-nose, and E-tongue, as well as the 
three-dimensional fusion matrix, to explore flavour differences among various roasted coffee samples. 
 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Chemicals and reagents 
All reagents or solvents were analytical, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), or GC-MS 
grade. HPLC grade methanol and formic acid were supplied by Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Sodium 
hydroxide and hydrochloric acid were purchased from Damao Chemical Reagent Factory (Tianjin, China). An 
SPME manual holder and 75 m Carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane (CAR/PDMS) were obtained from Supelco 
(Bellefonte, PA). The standard of C7‒C40 saturated alkanes was provided by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO,). 
Milli-Q water was obtained from a Milli-Q Plus water system (Millipore, Hetai, Shanghai, China). 
 
2.2. Samples and sample preparation 
Fresh coffee fruits (C. canephora, Xinglong robusta coffee, ‘Reyan1’) were harvested from the 
experimental station in January, 2015, at the Spice and Beverage Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Tropical Agricultural Sciences, in Hainan, which is one of the famous coffee growing regions of China. A total 
of fifteen samples were picked in the experimental station under the same climate and planting conditions, 
and five random samples were merged into one sample to make the samples more representative; thus three 
merged samples were used for the following experiment. All fruits were sampled at a mature stage with 
uniform size and colour (red). In this study, all fresh coffee fruits were processed by a dry process method, 
being dried until the moisture content of samples was 11.0 ± 1.0 g/100 g dry weight (DW) when subjected to 

  
 
6 
different drying techniques. Then, a huller was used to remove the shell of fruits to obtain green coffee beans 
for the subsequent experiments. 
 
2.3. Drying and roasting procedures 
The fresh coffee fruits were split into five equal portions for the subsequent drying processing; the final 
water content of green coffee beans was 11.0 ± 1.0 g/100 g DW. (a) RTD: The first portion of fresh coffee fruit 
was dried using natural air flow at room temperature of approximately 25 C for seven days. (b) SD: The 
second portion of fresh coffee fruit was dried in the SD chamber for five days. (c) HPD: The third portion of 
fresh coffee fruit was dehydrated using a dehumidified heat pump (RF-25II; Guangzhou Quanneng Energy 
Technology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China) at 50 C for 72 h and 70 % relative humidity. (d) HAD: The fourth 
portion of fresh coffee fruit was dehydrated using an electro-thermal blowing dry box (DHG-9030A, Shanghai 
Yiheng Laboratory Instrument Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) at 50 C for 108 h. (e) FD: The fifth portion of fresh 
coffee fruit was dried in a freeze dryer (JDG-0.2, Lanzhou Kejin Freeze Drying Instruments Co., Ltd., Lanzhou, 
China) under 40 Pa vacuum pressure for 25 h. A detailed description of drying procedures is provided in Dong, 
et al. (2017). The dried green coffee beans were then used for the roasting step. Samples of 100 g were taken 
from each portion and roasted using a PRE 1 Z drum coffee roaster (Emmerich am Rhein, Germany). The 
initial roasting temperature was 180 C, after which the roasting temperature varied from 180 C to 200 C to 
medium degree for 10 min. Coffee roasting conditions such as time and temperature were defined by the 
colour index of L*. All samples were ground using the ‘fine’ option of an electronic coffee grinder (Kenia, 
Mahlkönig, Germany) and the ground coffee was sieved using a standard sieve to exclude large particles. 
 
2.4. Physicochemical analysis 
The crude extract for physicochemical analysis was prepared by mixing 8.25 g coffee bean powder with 
150 mL distilled water in a hot water bath (95 C, 5 min) with stirring; after extraction, the extract was filtered 
through Whatman filter paper and the filtrate was stored at 4 C. The physicochemical parameters, total 
soluble solids (TSS), total solids (TS), pH, and total titratable acidity (TA) were determined according to the 
methods of Gloess et al. (2013) with minor modifications. The TSS content of the coffee samples was 
measured in Brix using an analogue refractometer (PAL-A; Atago, Tokyo, Japan). For TS, expressed as 
g/100 g DW, 4.00 g sample were accurately weighed and dried in a well-ventilated oven at 105 ± 2 C until 
reaching a constant weight. The pH value was quantified using a pH meter (FE-20; Mettler-Toledo, 
Greifensee, Switzerland). The TA, as milliequivalents of citric acid per 100 g dry matter, was determined by 

  
 
7 
titration with 0.1 M NaOH solution up to pH 8.1 until the pink end-point using phenolphthalein indicator.  
 
2.5. E-nose analysis 
The E-nose analyses were performed using a commercial Fox 3000 electronic nose (Alpha M.O.S., 
Toulouse, France). The structure of E-nose consists of pattern recognition software, HS-100 autosampler, 
and a sensor array unit. The sensor array is composed of six metal oxide semiconductor sensors, T30/1, 
T70/2, PA/2, LY2/AA, and LY2/gCT to detect sample gas. Coffee powder sample (1 g) was put into a 10-mL 
vial and incubated for 20 min at 60 C (300 rpm). Processed pure air was used as carrier gas to clean the 
sensor array to cause the signal response to return to zero; then the sample was measured using an injection 
volume of 300 L. Each sample was measured in triplicate, and the mean value was applied for further 
analysis. 
 
2.6. E-tongue analysis 
Coffee taste attributes were analysed using an Astree II potentiometric electronic tongue (Alpha M. O. S., 
Toulouse, France). This E-tongue system was comprised of an LS48 automatic sampler, sensor array, 
reference electrode (Ag/AgCl), and a Chemometric software package. The E-tongue contained seven 
chemical sensors: ZZ, JE, BB, CA, GA, HA, and JB, which are potentiometric sensors with an organic 
membrane coating with specific sensitivity and selectivity for each sensor. Prior to analysis, 0.01 M 
hydrochloric acid, sodium chloride, and sodium-L-glutamate were used to calibrate and diagnose the sensors 
and system. The instrument parameters were as follows: delay = 0 s, acquisition time = 120 s, interval = 1 s, 
stirring rate = 1, and acquisition period = 1. Between each measurement, 80 mL deionised water were used to 
clean the sensors, and the sensor signals were acquired using Astree software v.3.0.1. 
 
2.7. Volatile compounds analyses 
The volatile compounds of roasted coffee samples were determined using HS-SPME-GC-MS. An 
accurately weighed 1.0 g sample was filled into 20-mL screw vials fitted with polytetrafluorethylene-silicone 
septa; after incubation at 60 C for 20 min, the volatiles were then sampled with a 75-m CAR/PDMS fibre 
supplied by Supelco (Bellefonte, PA) for 40 min. After extraction, the fibre was immediately inserted into the 
injection port of the GC-MS for the desorption step at 250 C for 3 min. GC-MS analyses were carried out on 
an Agilent 7890A GC 5975C system coupled with a quadrupole mass filter for mass spectrometric detection 
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The chromatographic separation was achieved on a DB-WAX 

  
 
8 
capillary column (30 m × 0.25 mm, df = 0.25 m). Analytical conditions were as follows: the injector and 
transfer line temperatures were 230 and 250 C, respectively; the oven program began with a 40 C hold for 2 
min, was raised to 130 C at 1.5 C/min, then raised to 220 C at 4 C/min and held for 5 min. Helium was 
used as the carrier gas, with the flow of He at 1 mL min−1, and detection was performed in full scan mode over 
the mass range m/z 35–300 (Dong, Tan, Zhao, Hu, & Lu, 2015). The qualitative identification of compounds 
was achieved by comparison of their mass spectra and retention times to those of pure standards, as well as 
calculating the retention indices (RI) and matching against the NIST MS Search program, version 08. The 
quantification of compounds was achieved by integrating the selected specific ions to obtain relative peak 
areas. 
 
2.8. Data analysis and chemometric procedures 
Statistical analysis was performed through one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Duncan’s 
multiple test to identify significant differences among roasted coffee samples from different drying techniques 
using SPSS version 20.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL); all statistical tests were two-tailed and p < 0.05 or 
less was considered as significant. Chemometrics methods, PCA, and HCA were operated under the Matlab 
software platform (v. R2010a Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA) environment. All data are expressed as the means 
± SD (standard deviation) of triple measurements. 
 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Effect of drying methods on the TSS and TS content of roasted coffee beans 
The TSS and TS content of the roasted coffee samples from different drying methods is shown in Fig. 
1a-b. The TSS content of all samples ranged between 1.93 and 2.50 Brix, RTD samples had the lowest TSS 
content (1.93 Brix), followed by FD (2.01 Brix), with the HPD and HAD methods resulting in almost the same 
TSS content (2.31 Brix and 2.30 Brix, respectively), whereas SD samples had a significantly (p < 0.05) 
higher TSS content than that of other samples, which was in accordance with our previous study (Dong, Zhao, 
Hu, Dong, & Tan, 2017). In comparison, Gloess et al. (2013) investigated the effects of nine common 
extraction methods on the TSS content of coffee, which ranged from about 0.40 to 6.40 Brix. The broad 
range observed was likely due to the different brewing mechanisms, although most were similar to our results. 
The TS content was mainly related to the body; i.e. mouthfeel or texture, which constitutes an additional 
important sensory descriptor for coffee. In the present study, the levels of TS content in samples ranged from 
1.92 to 2.73 g/100 g DW, with a statistical significant difference (p < 0.05) being observed in the five 

  
 
9 
investigated types of roasted coffee samples, except between HAP and HAD, and RTD and FD samples. The 
SD method was considered to allow better retention of TS for coffee samples. 
 
3.2. Effect of drying method on the pH and TA of roasted coffee beans 
The pH value and TA of the roasted coffee samples from different drying techniques are presented in Fig. 
1c-d. Perceived acidity represents one of the key perceptions within the coffee organoleptic profile, as well as 
being considered as a particularly important criterion for a good cup of coffee. In the current study, the pH 
value of the samples ranged from 5.54 to 5.70, among which, the HAD samples had the highest pH value 
(5.70), whereas SD samples had the lowest (5.54). The pH value showed statistically significant differences 
(p < 0.05) among all different dried roasted coffee samples. The TA of coffee extract was in the range of 1.95 
to 2.15 mL of 0.1 M NaOH, whereas the TA of SD, RTD, and FD samples was higher than that of HPD and 
HAD samples, which may be related to the formation of acidic compounds during heat treatment in the HPD 
and HAD methods. Caporaso, Genovese, Canela, Civitella, and Sacchi (2014) reported that the pH values of 
Arabica coffee brews by Neapolitan, Espresso, American, and Moka techniques varied from 5.52 (Neapolitan 
coffee) to 6.01 (American coffee), which is in accordance with the results of our study. Gloess et al. (2013) 
reported similar results for the TA after nine common extraction methods, which indicated Nespresso samples 
as being the most acidic brew (pH = 5.41); although French press (pH = 5.92) was somewhat higher, the 
different roasting degree appeared to have no substantial influence on pH value. 
 
3.2. E-nose 
3.2.1. E-nose response to roasted coffee samples 
The electronic nose was a better method for analysing aroma, as it could acquire complete information 
related to volatile compounds in samples rather than qualitative and quantitative results (Tiggemann et al., 
2017). The typical E-nose responses to the roasted coffee samples are shown in Fig. 2a, where G/Go is used 
as the response value, i.e., the ratio between sample gas and pure air resistivity. Each curve represents the 
variation trend of a corresponding sensor with increasing time until a stable equilibrium is finally reached. It can 
be observed that the response values of sensors P30/2, PA/2, T70/2, and T30/1 increased; in contrast, the 
response values of sensor LY2/AA decreased, whereas the sensor LY2/gCT remained almost unchanged in 
the first 0 to 15 s. Subsequently, the response value of sensor P30/2 increased drastically and reached a 
stable equilibrium, and the response value of sensors PA/2, T70/2, T30/1 decreased gradually until reaching 
a steady value. However, the response value of sensor LY2/AA increased gradually in the interval of 20 to 90 

  
 
10 
s.  
The typical responses of the six sensors of the volatile compounds in roasted coffee samples from 
different drying techniques are presented in Fig. 2b. As can be observed, the variation trends of signals from 
different samples were similar; the responses for sensors P30/2 and PA/2 were significantly higher than those 
of the other sensors, and the responses of P30/2 for HAD, HPD, and FD samples were significantly different 
from those of the other dried samples. Moreover, the relative values of T30/1, T70/2, and LY2/AA were in the 
intermediate value, and significant differences were also observed between HPD, HAD, and FD samples, 
RTD, and SD samples. Notably, the responses of sensors in our study were in accordance with the report of 
Severini, Ricci, Marone, Derossi, and De Pilli (2015), in which E-nose was applied to analyse and discriminate 
the changes in chemical attributes and aromatic profile of espresso coffee as a result of the extraction time 
and grinding level. The differences may have resulted from the formation of novel volatile compounds and 
other similar volatile compounds among the various drying conditions (Yang et al., 2016). However, it is 
difficult to discriminate different dried samples only from observed sensor response values; thus, the signal 
information of the six sensors needs to be further processed and its internal relationships and differences 
explored. 
 
3.2.2. PCA of volatile compounds in roasted coffee samples 
PCA constitutes a statistical tool used to explain differentiation between samples and to extract 
information from the variables that mainly affects the sample spatial distribution. This procedure can reduce 
the dimensionality of the data matrix while retaining most of the information of the original data, as well as 
explain the relationship of objects and the correlation structure of the variables (Kaya, Yildiz, & Ünlütürk, 
2015). PCA was performed on the dataset of the response values of E-nose to evaluate the influence of 
drying processing on the grouping of the roasted coffee samples. The two-dimensional bi-plots of score and 
loading of the dried samples are presented in Fig. 2c-d. The principal components (PCs) PC1 and PC2 
represented 48.5% and 37.1% of the total variance, respectively, with the cumulative contribution rate of the 
first two PCs accounting for 85.6%, which indicates they are sufficient to explain the total variance in the 
dataset (Wold, Esbensen, & Gladi, 1987). It can be observed that grouping of the samples was clearly 
apparent in the bi-plot of PCA, with the RTD and HAD samples being located to the right of the X-axis, 
whereas the SD, HPD, and FD samples were located to the left of the X-axis, among which a slight overlap 
was observed between SD and HPD groups. Considering the loading plot demonstrating that the relationship 
between the E-nose variables P30/2, LY2/AA, and LY2/gCT had a higher influence on the differentiation 
ability, the sensor P30/2 likely contributed more to the HAD samples and the sensor LY2/AA contributed more 
Comment [A1]: 85.6% is not 100% 

  
 
11
to the FD samples, whereas the response values of LY2/gCT, T70/2, and PA/2 were more correlated with the 
SD and HPD samples. 
 
3.3. E-tongue 
3.3.1. E-tongue response to roasted coffee samples 
The mechanism of E-tongue was similar to that of E-nose, being able to detect taste profiles by electronic 
sensors to mimic taste perception in humans. A representative sample of the E-tongue sensor response to a 
roasted coffee sample is presented in Fig. 2a. Each curve represents the corresponding potentiometric 
difference value of a sensor against time. At first, all sensors (HA, ZZ, JB, GA, JE, BB, and CA) retained their 
initial values, then the responses of sensors GA and JE changed significantly in the first 10 s, decreasing and 
increasing, respectively, whereas the other sensors, HA, ZZ, JB, BB, and CA, changed relative slowly. From 
10 to 120 s, the response values of all sensors varied slowly and reached a dynamic equilibrium. The signal 
values of the 120th s of each sensor were used for further statistical analysis. In addition, ANOVA was utilised 
to analyse the significant difference of sensors from various types of roasted coffee samples. Fig. 2b shows 
the characteristic signal response of the tested samples, the result indicates a high stability of each sensor, 
with a significant difference being observed between different dried samples. Overall, all samples showed a 
similar changing trend for the seven sensors albeit with different response intensity. E-nose has also been 
used in the quality control and taste characterisation of food chemistry, such as by Lopetcharat et al. (2016), 
who provided a new approach to correlate between overall difference decision and E-tongue results as well 
as to discriminate civet coffee from different origins, obtaining a satisfactory performance. In addition, E-nose 
was also used to characterise espresso coffees brewed with different thermal profiles, thus providing useful 
information for the optimisation of processing conditions (Buratti, Benedetti, & Giovanelli, 2017). 
 
3.3.2 PCA of taste compounds in roasted coffee samples 
PCA was also performed on the E-nose dataset to distinguish roasted coffee samples from different 
drying techniques, taking the response values of sensors as input variables. Fig. 3c-d shows the score and 
loading plots of the first and the second components, PC1 and PC2, in the two-dimensional PC space, with 
the first two PCs explaining 79.0% of the total variance, at 58.0% and 21.0% for PC1 and PC2, respectively. It 
can be observed that the samples exhibit a tendency to form three major groups in the score bi-plot of PCA. A 
group comprised of SD and HPD samples was located close together in the first quadrant except for one HPD 
sample that was in the Y-axis; the RTD processed samples were all in the fourth quadrant with positive and 
negative score values at PC1 and PC2, whereas the HAD and FD samples were all almost located in the third 

  
 
12 
quadrant of the graph except for one FD sample. Fig. 3d represents loading plots of different kinds of roasted 
coffee samples, the analysis of which can explain which sensor combinations were responsible for the 
distribution and grouping of the samples in the score plot. The HAD and FD samples were differentiated by 
CA with negative score values at PC1 and PC2; the GA and JE were mainly responsible for the sample 
discrimination in the direction of PC1, whereas BB, HA, and ZZ contributed more to the separation along with 
the direction of PC2. In comparison, in a previous study regarding E-tongue combined with PCA, we reported 
that when Chinese robusta coffee samples from different cultivars were discriminated using E-tongue data 
with the aid of chemometrics, a satisfactory performance was achieved (Dong, Zhao, Hu, Dong, & Tan, 2017). 
 
3.4. HS-SPME-GC-MS 
3.4.1. HS-SPME-GC-MS analysis of volatile components in roasted coffee samples 
The volatile profile of coffee constitutes a very important organolepic characteristic for the acceptance 
and preference of high quality coffee brew. In order to evaluate the effect of drying methods on the flavour of 
roasted coffee beans, HS-SPME-GC-MS was used to analyse the volatile compounds of each sample 
afforded by different drying methods. The total ion current chromatogram of all samples with different drying 
methods and the relative content of volatile compounds from different classes in coffee samples are shown in 
Fig. 4a, b, and the detailed volatile composition of samples is listed in Table 1 in the Supplementary material. 
A total number of 133 volatile compounds were detected in roasted samples. The volatile compounds were 
classified into 11 groups based on the chemical properties, including 11 furans, 19 pyrazines, 31 ketones, 9 
aldehydes, 9 phenols, 7 pyrroles, 7 pyridines, 5 esters, 8 acids, 7 alcohols, and 18 others (Table 2, 
Supplementary material). Sunarharum, Williams, and Smyth (2014) also reviewed that coffee volatile 
compounds comprise several classes, which was in accordance with our present study. Although there was 
no significant difference in the qualitative profile of roasted coffee samples prepared from different drying 
methods, an ANOVA analysis performed to compare the peak area of volatile compounds of different classes 
indicated that a significant difference could be observed among the majority of these compounds. 
The difference in degree of change of volatile compounds between the different drying methods possibly 
arose from the different drying mechanism and dehydration behaviour, as the concentrations of furans and 
pyrazines were the highest when compared with those of other classes. Approximately 111, 109, 102, 93, and 
90 kinds of volatile compounds were identified in samples from the RTD, SD, HPD, HAD, and FD methods, 
respectively. For RTD and SD samples, a total 11 kinds of furans were detected, with the concentration of 
furans in particular being highest (25.46 %) in the RTD sample, with the 2,2’-methylenebis-furan being only 
found in this sample. 2-Furanmethanol and furfural contribute substantially to the furans of coffee samples; 

  
 
13 
furthermore, 2-furanmethanol accounted for about 19.0% of total volatile compounds. A total of 19 kinds of 
pyrazines were detected, which contribute to the toasty and earthy flavour, with methylpyrazine and 
dimethylpyrazine accounting for 5.5% and 10.0%, respectively. In HPD and HAD drying, the number of 
volatiles decreased when compared to that of RTD and SD drying; this was attributed to long exposure to high 
temperature air resulting in the loss of flavour precursors, although we found that the HPD method was 
superior in preserving ketones, phenols, esters, and other volatiles.  
FD drying decreased the varieties of total volatile compounds significantly. Although previous research 
reported that FD methods could retain the volatiles to the greatest extent, our studies demonstrated that the 
long vacuum treatment of FD obviously affected the variety and quantity of roasted coffee samples. In general, 
the postharvest dehydration is one of the most important factors in regulating the formation and release of 
volatile compounds. Specifically, there are four pathways to generate volatiles during the drying process: 
Maillard reaction, lipid oxidation and degradation, interaction between oxidised lipids and amino acids, and 
long-chain compound degradation (Yang et al., 2016; Deng, Luo, Wang, & Zhao, 2015). The drying 
mechanisms and pathways that led to the various kinds and quantity of the volatiles from roasted coffees 
identified in the present study should be further investigated in future studies. 
 
3.4.2. PCA of HS-SPME-GC-MS analysis 
PCA was performed on the data matrix (15 samples × 11 volatile classes) to observe possible sample 
distribution according to different drying methods. The PCA plot presented in Fig. 2a, b explains 70.9% of the 
total cumulative variance contribution. PC1 and PC2 account for 49.8% and 21.1% of the total variance, 
respectively, as shown in the score plot of PCA (Fig. 2a), with roasted samples clustering into five distinct 
groups in the dimensional graph based on the PC1 × PC2 score. The HAD and FD processed samples were 
all located in the fourth quadrant of the graph, whereas samples of HPD were in the upper quadrant and most 
RTD and SD samples localised in the third quadrant of the graph except for one sample from SD treatment. 
Fig. 2b shows the relationship of dried samples with volatile compounds. To identify which compounds 
contribute to the class separation of the different groups, it can be observed that the esters, aldehydes, and 
acids are highly and positively related to PC1, and mainly distinguish HAD and FD samples from other dried 
samples. In addition, phenols have a high score in the positive direction of PC2, which contributes greatly to 
the separation of HPD samples. Finally, RTD and SD samples are characterised by the highest content of 
pyrazines and alcohols, which were highly and negatively correlated with PC1. Overall, these results indicate 
that the three analytical instruments, E-nose, E-tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS could be used for the quality 
evaluation of roasted coffee beans from five drying methods, and that the results were consistent across 
Comment [A2]: Which 
dimethylpyrazien: 2,6, 2,5 or 2,3 or all of 
them together? 

  
 
14 
platforms. 
 
3.5. HCA of the fusion dataset of E-nose, E-tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS 
In order to confirm the results obtained from PCA, HCA (Granato, Santos, Escher, Ferreira, & Maggio, 
2018) was applied to the fused dataset comprised of E-nose, E-tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS data, 
employing the Ward’s linkage method and Euclidean distances to calculate the interpoint distances between 
samples dried by different methods. The dendrogram obtained, shown in Fig. 6, indicates the relationships 
and distribution patterns among the roasted coffee samples with different drying methods. The dendrograms 
clearly showed that the 15 tested samples were clustered into two major groups. Group A consisted of six 
samples (HAD and FD), group B consisted of nine samples (RTD, SD, and HAD), and samples with the same 
drying modes were closely clustered but fully discriminated from each other in the dendrogram. These 
classification groups were consistent with the PCA results, in which all roasted coffee samples were fully 
distinguished according to their drying methods. 
 
4. Conclusion 
In this study, the effect of drying processes (RTD, SD, HPD, HAD, and FD) on the aromatic profile and 
taste properties of dried coffee beans was studied. Fingerprint analysis, E-nose, E-tongue, and 
HS-SPME-GC-MS, coupled with chemometrics methods, including PCA, HCA, and ANOVA, were applied to 
the single or fused dataset to evaluate the quality of roasted coffee beans. Consistent with our hypothesis, we 
found that the drying process had a marked effect on pH, TA, TS, and TSS, and significant differences were 
found among samples with different drying methods. In addition, the results indicated that the HPD method 
was superior in preserving ketones, phenols, and esters. Furthermore, PCA combined with E-nose, E-tongue, 
and HS-SPME-GC-MS could effectively discriminate roasted coffee samples derived from different drying 
processes. HCA coupled to the fused data matrix achieved similar results when compared with PCA. In 
summary, our study supports and encourages the application of this method for roasted coffee sample 
discrimination and the establishment of similar methods for other heat-sensitive agricultural products. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31501404), the Fund of the 
Beijing Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety, Beijing Technology and Business University (FQS-201806), 
and the Fund of Central Public-interest Scientific Institution Basal Research of CATAS (1630142017005). 
 

  
 
15 
References 
Buratti, S., Benedetti, S., & Giovanelli, G. (2017). Application of electronic senses to characterize espresso 
coffees brewed with different thermal profiles. European Food Research and Technology, 243, 
511–520. 
Burmester, K., & Eggers, R. (2010). Heat and mass transfer during the coffee drying process. Journal of Food 
Engineering, 99, 430–436. 
Burmester, K., Fehr, H., & Eggers, R. (2011). A comprehensive study on the themophysical material 
properties for an innovative coffee drying process. Drying Technology, 29, 1562–1570. 
Caporaso, N., Genovese, A., Canela, M. D., Civitella, A., & Sacchi, R. (2014). Neapolitan coffee brew 
chemical analysis in comparison to expresso, moka and American brews. Food Research International, 
61, 152–160. 
Cheng, B., Furtado, A., Smyth, H. E., & Henry, R. J. (2016). Influence of genotype and environment on coffee 
quality. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 57, 20–30. 
Deng, Y., Luo, Y. L., Wang, Y. G., & Zhao, Y. Y. (2015). Effect of different drying methods on the myosin 
structure, amino acid composition, protein digestibility and volatile profile of squid fillets. Food 
Chemistry, 171, 168–176. 
Dong, W. J., Hu, R. S., Chu, Z., Zhao, J. P., Tan, L. H. (2017). Effect of different drying techniques on 
bioactive components, fatty acid composition, and volatile profile of robusta coffee beans. Food 
Chemistry, 234, 121–130. 
Dong, W. J., Tan, L. H., Zhao, J. P., Hu, R. S., & Lu, M. Q. (2015). Characterization of fatty acid, amino acid 
and volatile compound compositions and bioactive components of seven coffee (Coffea robusta) 
cultivars grown in Hainan province, China. Molecules, 20, 16687–16708. 
Dong, W. J., Zhao, J. P., Hu, R. S., Dong, Y. P., & Tan, L. H. (2017). Differentiation of Chinese robusta 
coffees according to species, using a combined electronic nose and tongue, with the aid of 
chemometrics. Food Chemistry, 229, 743–751. 
Gloess, A. N., Schönbächler, B., Klopprogge, B., D'Ambrosio, L., Chatelain, K., Bongartz, A., et al. (2013). 
Comparison of nine common coffee extraction methods: instrumental and sensory analysis. European 
Food Research and Technology, 236, 607–627. 
Granato, D., Santos, J. S., Escher, G. B., Ferreira, B. L., & Maggio, R. M. (2018). Use of principal component 
analysis (PCA) and hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) for multivariate association between bioactive 
compounds and functional properties in foods: A critical perspective. Trends in Food Science & 

  
 
16 
Technology, 72, 83–90. 
Huang, X. C., Guo, C. F., Yuan, Y. H., Luo, X. X., & Yue, T. L. (2015). Detection of medicinal off-flavor in 
apple juice with artificial sensing system and comparison with best panel evaluation and GC-MS. Food 
Control, 51, 270–277. 
Kaya, Z., Yidiz, S., & Ünlütürk, S. (2015). Effect of UV-C irradiation and heat treatment on the shelf life 
stability of a lemon-melon juice blend: Multivariate statistical approach. Innovative Food Science & 
Emerging Technologies, 29, 230–239. 
Lopetcharat, K., Kulapichitr, F., Suppavorasatit, I., Chodjarusawad, T., Phatthara-aneksin, A., Pratontep, S., 
et al. (2016). Relationship between overall difference decision and electronic tongue: Discrimination of 
civet coffee. Journal of Food Engineering, 180, 60–68. 
Nilnont, W., Thepa, S., Janjai, S., Kasayapanand, N., Thamrongmas, C., & Bala, B. K. (2012). Finite element 
simulation for coffee (Coffea arabica) drying. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 90, 341–350. 
Peris, M., & Escuder-Gilabert, L. (2016). Electronic noses and tongues to access food authentication and 
adulteration. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 58, 40–54. 
Rosa, A. R. D., Leone, F., Cheli, F., & Chiofaloa, V. (2017). Fusion of electronic nose, electronic tongue and 
computer vision for animal source food authentication and quality assessment – A review. Journal of 
Food Engineering, 210, 62–75. 
Severini, C., Ricci, I., Marone, M., Derossi, A., & De Pilli, T. (2015). Changes in the aromatic profile of 
espresso coffee as a function of the grinding grade and extraction time: A study by the electronic nose 
system. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63, 2321–2327. 
Sunarharum, W. B., Williams, D. J., & Smyth, H. E. (2014). Complexity of coffee flavor: A compositional and 
sensory perspective. Food Research International, 62, 315–325. 
Suzihaque, M. U. H., & Driscoll, R. (2016). Effects of solar radiation, buoyancy of air flow and optimization 
study of coffee drying in a heat recovery dryer. Procedia Engineering, 148, 812–822. 
Tiggemann, L., Ballen, S. C., Bocalon, C. M., Graboski, A. M., Manzoli, A., Steffen, J., et al. (2017). Electronic 
nose system based on polyaniline films sensor array with different dopants for discrimination of artificial 
aromas. Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies, 43, 112–116. 
Toledo, P. R. A. B., Pezza, L., Pezza, H. R., & Toci, A. T. (2016). Relationship between the different aspects 
related to coffee quality and their volatile compounds. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and 
Food Safety, 15, 705–719. 
Wold, S., Esbensen, K., & Geladi, P. (1987). Principal component analysis. Chemometrics and Intelligent 
Laboratory Systems, 2, 37–52. 

  
 
17 
Yang, N., Liu, C. J., Liu, X. K., Degn, T. K., Munchow, M., & Fisk, I. (2016). Determination of volatile marker 
compounds of common coffee roast defect. Food Chemistry, 211, 206–214. 
Zhang, M., Chen, H. Z., Mujumdar, A. S., Tang, J., Miao, S., & Wang, Y. C. (2017). Recent developments in 
high-quality drying of vegetables, fruits, and aquatic products. Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition, 57, 1239–1255. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
18 
Figure captions 
Fig. 1 Total soluble solids content (a), total solids content (b), pH value (c), and total titratable acidity (d) of 
roasted coffee beans prepared by different drying methods. 
Fig. 2 E-nose responses for representative roasted coffee beans (a), and mean values of seven sensors (b) 
for coffee samples. PCA of E-nose data for coffee samples with different drying methods (c: score plot, 
d: loading plot). (RTD (
), SD (
), HPD (
), HAD (
), FD (
)). 
Fig. 3 E-tongue responses for representative roasted coffee beans (a), and mean values of seven sensors (b) 
for coffee samples. PCA of E-tongue data for roasted coffee samples with different drying methods (c: 
score plot, d: loading plot). (RTD (
), SD (
), HPD (
), HAD (
), FD (
)). 
Fig. 4 Total ion chromatogram of volatiles from roasted coffee samples with different drying methods (a). 
Relative content of volatile compounds among different classes in coffee samples (b). 
Fig. 5 PCA bi-plot for coffee samples using the volatiles matrix as input variables (a: score plot, b: loading 
plot). (RTD (
), SD (
), HPD (
), HAD (
), FD (
)). 
Fig. 6 Dendrogram obtained by HCA of roasted coffee samples with a dataset comprising combined E-nose, 
E-tongue, and HS-SMPE-GC-MS data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
19 
Fig. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
20 
Fig. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
21 
Fig. 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
22 
Fig. 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
23 
Fig. 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
24 
Fig. 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
25 
Highlights 
 
Drying process effects on roasted coffee bean quality properties were measured. 
 
Volatile and taste components were profiled by E-nose, E-tongue, and HS-SPME-GC-MS. 
 
Three dimensional datasets plus statistical modelling clearly discriminated samples. 
 
Heat pump drying best preserved volatiles, producing high quality dried coffee. 
 
 
 
 
