© 2020 Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care | Published by Wolters Kluwer ‑ Medknow	
69
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a long‑term metabolic disorder that is 
characterized by high blood sugar, insulin resistance, and relative 
lack of insulin. Common symptoms include increased thirst, 
frequent urination, and unexplained weight loss. Insulin, a 
pancreatic hormone, helps glucose from food get into the cells 
to be used for energy.[1]
Diabetes mellitus type‑2 is defined as a metabolic disorder that 
results in hyperglycemia (high blood glucose levels) due to the body:
•	
Developing insulin resistance
•	
Being unable to produce enough insulin.
The American Heart Association  (AHA) and American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) have given a cautious nod to the 
use of artificial sweeteners in place of sugar to combat obesity, 
metabolic syndrome, and diabetes, all risk factors for heart 
disease.
“While they are not magic bullets, smart use of non‑nutritive 
sweeteners could help you reduce added sugars in your diet, 
therefore lowering the number of calories you eat. Reducing 
calories could help you attain and maintain a healthy body weight, 
and thereby lower your risk of heart disease and diabetes,” said 
Dr. Christopher Gardner, an associate professor of medicine at 
Stanford University in California, in a press release accompanying 
the scientific statement.[2,3]
Over a past few decades, diabetes mellitus has become the 
most common endocrine disorder and the most important 
comorbidity in the world. Its main cause is believed to be the 
Effect of artificial sweeteners on insulin resistance 
among type‑2 diabetes mellitus patients
Kushagra Mathur1, Rajat Kumar Agrawal1, Shailesh Nagpure2, Deepali Deshpande3
1Medical Intern, Department of Pharmacology, 2Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, 
3Laboratory Assistant, Central Research Laboratory, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Sawangi, Maharashtra, India
Abstract
Introduction: Incidence of diabetes mellitus has increased over the past few years, mainly due to our eating habits and physical 
inactivity. This also includes the use of artificial sweetening agents which have broadly replaced other forms of sugars and have 
shown a paradoxical, negative effect on blood glucose. Ingestion of these artificial sweeteners (AS) results in the release of insulin 
from pancreas which is mistaken for glucose (due to their sweet taste). This increases the levels of insulin in blood eventually leading 
to decreased receptor activity due to insulin resistance. Methodology: It is a crosssectional study that was conducted on patients 
diagnosed with type-2 diabetes mellitus of a tertiary care hospital in Central India. All the diabetics that presented in the OPD were 
divided into 2 groups based on whether they use AS (group A) or not (group B). Insulin resistance was calculated for each group 
using HOMA-IR and graphs were plotted. Results: The HOMAIR values for Group A and B ranged from 0.9–24.33 and 0.12–10.83 
with mean values 7.39 and 2.6, respectively, showing that the ones who used AS had a higher insulin resistance. The study also 
showed that the duration of use of artificial sweeteners had a direct impact on insulin resistance.
Keywords: Artificial sweeteners, diabetes mellitus, glucose metabolism, HOMA‑IR, insulin resistance
Original Article
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:
Website:  
www.jfmpc.com
DOI:  
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_329_19
Address for correspondence: Dr. Shailesh Nagpure, 
Department of Pharmacology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, 
Sawangi, Maharashtra ‑ 442 001, India. 
E‑mail: drshaileshnagpure@gmail.com
How to cite this article: Mathur K, Agrawal RK, Nagpure S, Deshpande D. 
Effect of artificial sweeteners on insulin resistance among type-2 diabetes 
mellitus patients. J Family Med Prim Care 2020;9:69-71.
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to 
remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as appropriate credit is 
given and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
Received: 22-04-2019	
	
Revised: 04-12-2019  
Accepted: 12-12-2019	
	
Published: 28-01-2020

Mathur, et al.: Effect of artificial sweeteners on insulin resistance among type-2 diabetes mellitus patients
Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care	
70	
Volume 9  :  Issue 1  :  January 2020
development of resistance to insulin by the body. An important 
factor nowadays thought to be involved is faulty or inappropriate 
food habits—junk food, high‑fat and high‑carbohydrate diet with 
low fiber content.[4]
According to some studies, the prime reason for development 
of diabetes mellitus is believed to be artificial sweeteners. In 
one study, people were given either sucralose or water and 
then subjected to glucose tolerance test. Those given sucralose 
had higher blood insulin levels.[5,6] Another study compared a 
dose‑dependent relationship between artificially sweetened soft 
drinks and risk of type‑2 diabetes mellitus.[7]
This study aims to correlate insulin resistance with consumption 
of artificial sweeteners.
Aims and Objectives
This study is designed to find any correlation between 
ingestion of  artificial sweetening agents and their effect 
on insulin resistance. The blood glucose and serum insulin 
levels of  the patients were recorded and insulin resistance 
was calculated using the HOMA‑IR  (Homeostatic Model 
Assessment for Insulin Resistance) calculator and scale, 
developed by Matthew et al.[8]
Methodology
Study	 Type:
It is a cross‑sectional observational study.
Inclusion Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
1) Patients who have given a 
written consent.
1) Patients suffering from any other 
endocrinological illness.
2) Patients diagnosed with 
type‑2 DM.
2) Patients suffering from gestational 
diabetes mellitus
3) Patients consuming 
artificial sweetening agents.
3) Patients with type‑2 DM, receiving 
insulin therapy.
Study	 Design:
The study will be conducted on patients diagnosed with type‑2 
diabetes mellitus of a tertiary care hospital in Central India.
Sample Size:
Patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus irrespective of their age and 
gender, presenting in the hospital OPD will be a part of this study.
After a written consent has been achieved, the sample will be 
divided into two groups:
1.	 Group A ‑ The patients who regularly consume artificial 
sweetening agents
2.	 Group B ‑ The patients who do not consume artificial 
sweeteners in any form.
Patients from both the groups will be tested for fasting blood 
sugar levels and serum insulin, individually. Insulin resistance 
will be calculated by applying the values of both the parameters 
in the HOMA‑IR calculator.
The information will be kept confidential and under quality 
control.
HOMA‑IR provides us with the scales of insulin resistance using 
a basic mathematical algorithm, given as:[7]
Substituting the values for serum insulin and FBS in the above 
formula, insulin resistance can be easily calculated.
To assess insulin resistance, HOMA‑IR also provides a scale or 
classification as:[7]
Normal Insulin Resistance
Less than 3
Moderate Insulin Resistance
3-5
Severe Insulin Resistance
Above 5
For an individual with no history of type‑2 diabetes mellitus, the 
HOMA‑IR reading should fall below 3.
For example, for a person with FSL of 100 (Normal = 70‑110 mg/dl) 
and serum insulin of 10 (normal = 5‑20 mU/L), the HOMA‑IR 
reading will be = 2.46 (below 3) which is normal.
Moreover, if a patient currently is under the “Moderate” class, 
the patient has the probability to develop type‑2 diabetes mellitus 
in future.
The data from groups A and B were compared for analysis of 
insulin resistance.
Observations and Result
Volunteers from both the groups were well informed and after 
obtaining their consent, blood was drawn and tested for fasting 
serum insulin levels and fasting serum glucose levels which were 
recorded.
Using the above data, the volunteers had their 
HOMA‑IR value calculated and individually noted and charted 
as follows:
Group A:
The HOMA‑IR values for Group A and B ranged from 0.9–24.33 
and 0.12–10.83 with mean values 7.39 and 2.6, respectively 
[Figures 1 and 2]. Both the charts were matched, checked with 
the data, and the findings were noted.

Mathur, et al.: Effect of artificial sweeteners on insulin resistance among type-2 diabetes mellitus patients
Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care	
71	
Volume 9  :  Issue 1  :  January 2020
Discussion
A similar study carried out by de Koning et al. in 2011 compared 
the development of diabetes mellitus type‑2 with the consumption 
of  artificially sweetened beverages and sugar‑sweetened 
beverages (SSB) [Figure 3].[9] Increased intake of  artificial 
sweetened beverages increased the incidence of type‑2 diabetes, 
suggesting possible mechanism of insulin resistance over time.
Another study carried out in 2016 by Löfvenborg JE et al.[10] 
showed a positive correlation between sugar‑sweetened beverages 
and development of LADA.
Recent studies have shown that sucrose or sucralose increase the T1R2 
and T1R3 taste receptors that in turn stimulated the intestine and 
circulating levels of GIP and GLP‑1 leading to hyperinsulinemia.[11]
Conclusion
Group A patients who consumed artificial sweetening agents 
had higher insulin resistance as compared to group B patients 
who had no artificial sweeteners based on HOMA‑IR. 
However, further studies are required to conclude a direct 
correlation of  artificial sweeteners with decreased insulin 
sensitivity.
Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
References
1.	
Barnett AH. Type 2 Diabetes. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press; 
2012. p. 162.
2.	
Mehnert H. Health and Sugar Substitutes. ERGOB Conference 
on Sugar Substitutes, Geneva, October/November 1978: 
Proceedings. Basel, Karger, 1979. p. 262-5.
3.	
Wallace TM, Levy JC, Matthews DR. Use and abuse of HOMA 
modeling. Diabetes Care 2004;27:1487‑95.
4.	
Sylvetsky  AC, Welsh  JA, Brown  RJ, Vos  MB. Low‑calorie 
sweetener consumption is increasing in the United States. 
Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:640‑6.
5.	
Pepino MY, Yanina Pepino M, Tiemann CD, Patterson BW, 
Wice BM, Klein S. Sucralose affects glycemic and hormonal 
responses to an oral glucose load. Diabetes Care 
2013;36:2530‑5. 
6.	
Romo‑Romo  A, Aguilar‑Salinas  CA, Brito‑Córdova 
GX, Gómez‑Díaz RA, Almeda‑Valdes  P. Sucralose 
decreases insulin sensitivity in healthy subjects: 
A  randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 
2018;108:485‑91.
7.	
Greenwood  D, Threapleton  D, Evans  C, Cleghorn  C, 
Nykjaer  C, Woodhead  C, et  al. Association between 
sugar‑sweetened and artificially sweetened soft drinks 
and type  2 diabetes: Systematic review and dose–
response meta‑analysis of prospective studies. Br J Nutr 
2014;112:725‑34.
8.	
Matthew  DR, Hosker  JP, Rudenski  AS, Naylor  BA, 
Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis model assessment: 
Insulin resistance and beta‑cell function from fasting 
plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in man. 
Diabetologia 1985;28:412‑9.
9.	
de Koning  L, Malik  VS, Rimm  EB, Willett  WC, Hu  FB. 
Sugar‑sweetened and artificially sweetened beverage 
consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes in men. Am J Clin 
Nutr 2011;93:1321‑7.
10.	 Löfvenborg JE, Andersson  T, Carlsson  PO, Dorkhan  M, 
Groop  L, Martinell  M, et  al. Sweetened beverage 
intake and risk of latent autoimmune diabetes in 
adults  (LADA) and type  2 diabetes. Eur J Endocrinol 
2016;175:605‑14.
11.	 Sánchez‑Tapia M, Martínez‑Medina J, Tovar AR, Torres N. 
Natural and artificial sweeteners and high fat diet modify 
differential taste receptors, insulin, and TLR4‑mediated 
inflammatory pathways in adipose tissues of rats. Nutrients 
2019;11:880.
Figure 3: Study published by Koning et al. In 2011
Figure  1: Graphical representation of patients receiving artificial 
sweeteners
Figure 2: Graphical representation of patients not taking artificial 
sweeteners
