4
Endophytic bacteria in plant
disease management
Monika Singha, Meenakshi Srivastavaa, Ajay Kumarb, A.K. Singhc, K.D. Pandeya
aCentre of Advance study in Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India, bInstitute of Plant Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization,
Volcani Center, Rishon LeZion, Israel, cKrishi Vigyan Kendra, Khalilabad, India
4.1
Introduction
Soil being an important component of environment not only serves as a valuable nat-
ural resource in agriculture system but also supports the numerous life processes.
Agricultural productivity directly or indirectly is linked with the residing microbial
diversity inhabiting in the soil, and in the recent years, plant growth-promoting bac-
teria (PGPB), particularly endophytic bacteria have emerged as a major and prominent
players for sustainable agriculture. There are several forms of beneficial relationships
found between plants and microorganisms such as mutualism, commensalism, sym-
biosis, cohabitation, biofilms, and so on. Among all these, endophytes represent the
group of microorganisms that live inside host microenvironment and receive protec-
tion from environmental stresses, access to nutrients, and subsequently face lesser
competition from other microbes (Dutta et al., 2014). These endophytes are more cru-
cial to plant defense mechanism as they interact directly to plant system than rhizo-
sphere and phyllosphere bacteria. In plant systems, intercellular spaces are the best
sites for growth and multiplication of endophytic bacteria due to the availability of
sufficient nutrients like potassium, calcium, sulfur, carbohydrates as well as various
amino acids and organic acids (Madore and Webb, 1981; Canny and McCully, 1988;
Canny and Huang, 1993). Endophytic bacteria differs from phytopathogens in the
sense that they do not cause any symptoms on host plants (Holiday, 1989; Schulz
and Boyle, 2006) hence the absence of any morphological changes in plant tissues like
formation of root-nodule induced by symbionts. Endophytes may colonize all parts of
plants such as spaces in between the cell walls and vascular bundles of plant roots,
stems and leaves, tissues, or flowers (de Melo Pereira et al., 2012). Endophytic bac-
teria colonize the internal tissue of the plants either symbiotically or in a mutualistic
relationship (Dudeja et al., 2012). Microorganisms that may be considered as potential
biological control agents for plant diseases management include bacterial endophytes
as well as plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR). Microbes exhibiting
growth-promoting traits have been exploited as microbial fertilizer.
Almost 3 lakhs plant species existed on the earth (Strobel et al., 2004). Out of these,
complete endophytic biology could be made possible only for few plants. Therefore,
the prospects are quite high to search for new and beneficial endophytic bacteria from
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818734-0.00004-8
© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

the diverse genera inhabiting in different ecosystems (Muthukumar et al., 2017).
There are various ways by which bacterial endophytes can confer resistance or toler-
ance to the host plant from different biotic and abiotic stresses. Tolerance to a partic-
ular stress of biological or nonbiological origin can be facilitated by release of
antimicrobial compounds, siderophore production, competition for space and nutri-
ents, and subsequencially as last resort modulating the plant-resistance response
(Mercado-Blanco and Lugtenberg, 2014; Santoyo et al., 2016).
4.1.1
Plant diseases and endophytes
There are various common plant diseases affecting the crop productivity worldwide.
Some of the important ones include blight, canker, leaf curl, leaf spot, powdery mil-
dew, root rot, and wilt disease. Endophytes (bacteria, fungi, and actinomycetes) play
an important role to overcome the phytopathogens. Endophytic bacteria can produce
antimicrobial compounds, siderophores and can induce systemic resistance through
the production of pathogenesis-related proteins (PRPs) and defense enzymes to inhibit
disease development by phytopathogens (Compant et al., 2010; Reinhold-Hurek and
Hurek, 2011; Zachow et al., 2015). Bacterial endophytes are also promising biocontrol
agents (Berg et al., 2005).
Disease-causing plant microorganisms adversely affect the crop yields by signif-
icantly reducing plant performance and crop quality (Gupta et al., 2014). The
endophytic bacterial strains Lysinibacillus sp., Bacillus subtilis, nitrogen-fixing
bacteria (Azotobacter chrococcum) and phosphate-solubilizing bacteria (PSB)
(Pseudomonas cepacea), as well as their combination as bio-fertilizers is demon-
strated to inhibit bacterial wilt disease incidence in chili plant up to 80% (Istifadah
et al., 2017). The highest (80%) disease suppression was showed by the endophytic
bacterial strain B. subtilis. Furthermore, this endophyte was also able to significantly
promote the chili growth. The usual method for the control of such phytopathogens is
to apply chemical pesticides, but this strategy has led to increased concerns over envi-
ronmental contamination and has also resulted in the development of resistance
against the individual chemical over the time. This needs a constant development
of new pesticides. The endophytic bacteria serving as biocontrol agent or bio-
insecticides are considered as an effective alternative to chemical pesticides.
A large number of mechanisms are involved in biocontrol of the plant diseases and
may involve direct antagonism via production of antibiotics, siderophores, hydrogen
cyanide, hydrolytic enzymes (chitinases, proteases, and lipases), etc. (Gupta et al.,
2014). Endophytic bacteria were isolated from the explants of healthy wild pistachio
trees (Pistacia atlantica L.) from various locations of Baneh and Marivan regions,
Iran. The isolates were identified as Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Bacillus,
Pantoea, and Serratia genus. Biocontrol assays showed that Pseudomonas protegens
Pb78 strain had the highest inhibitory effects on bacterial plant pathogens, Pseudomo-
nas syringae pv. Syringae Pss 20 and Pseudomonas tolaasii Pt18 had lesser effect
under in vitro condition. The isolation of endophytic bacterial strains belonging to
Pantoea, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Serratia, and Stenotrophomonas genus from wild
62
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

pistachio trees had promising plant growth-promoting (PGB) potential and biocontrol
activity (Etminani and Harighi, 2018).
4.2
Endophytic bacteria in disease management
Endophytes are well known for various direct or indirect beneficial mechanisms
responsible for plant defense mechanism and stress management of the host plant.
Some of them are known to be linked with the phytoremediation, bio-prospecting,
phytochrome synthesis, and siderophore production. Along with all these processes,
these bacteria also possess a range of biocontrol mechanism to directly counter plant
pathogens and insects. Endophytic bacteria are believed to elicit plant growth promo-
tion and disease management in one of the two ways. Directly, by producing different
phytohormones such as abscisic acid (ABA), auxin, or cytokinin or by producing the
enzyme ACC deaminase, which helps in lowering plant ethylene (ET) levels and indi-
rectly, by preventing infections via antifungal or antibacterial pathogens, by side-
rophore production, and nanoparticles synthesis to outcompete pathogens or by
establishing the plant’s systemic resistance.
PGPB including endophytes as biocontrol agents have certain advantages over the
conventional chemical control methods because of their eco-friendly and nontoxic
nature. Naturally occurring microorganisms, and their application are sustainable
not only for the environment but also for the human health. Another advantage of
PGPB endophyte as biocontrol agent is their mode of action against the pathogens
or the diseases, which also helps in the enhancement of crop growth and yields
(Singh et al., 2017). The four endophytic bacterial strains Ochrobactrum sp.
CB36/1, Pantoea agglomerans CC37/2, Bacillus thuringiensis CA41/1, and Pseudo-
monas fluorescens CC44 suppressed the effects of bacterial spot disease caused by
Xanthomonas euvesicatoria (Xe) on the development of tomato and pepper plant
(Akkopru et al., 2018).
Members of the Bacillus genus are considered as the factories for the production of
biomolecules that are potential inhibitors of growth of multiple phytopathogens
(Meena and Kanwar, 2015). The lipopeptides have been tried as potent versatile
weapons to deal with a variety of phytopathogens. Bacillus spp. had been isolated
from seeds of different varieties of maize. They have been documented to produce
antifungal compounds, generally lipopeptides. Lipopeptide extracts from Bacillus
spp. isolated from Indian popcorn and yellow dent corn have shown inhibitory action
against Fusarium moniliforme. The B. subtilis strain SG JW.03 isolated from Indian
popcorn showed strong inhibition of Arabidopsis seed mycoflora. Endophytic bacteria
residing in many maize varieties may function to protect hosts by secreting antifungal
lipopeptides that may inhibit pathogens as well as induce the upregulation of
pathogenesis-related genes of host plants [systemic acquired resistance (SAR)]
(Gond et al., 2014).
In all, 663 isolates of microorganisms, including bacteria, were collected from
surface-sterilized roots of spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.). These isolates were
screened for their ability to control Fusarium wilt of spinach caused by Fusarium
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
63

oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae. Nine bacteria were effective in reducing disease inci-
dence. Subsequently, spinach seeds were treated with the endophytic bacterial iso-
lates, followed by sowing in an infested field. Four bacteria species were observed
to reduce disease incidence. Among these, endophytic bacterial strain Enterobacter
cloacae SM lO, strain was observed to inhabit within xylem vessels of spinach roots
as evidenced through light and immune electron microscopy and found to induce sig-
nificant suppression of disease incidence (Tsuda et al., 2001). The culturable endo-
phytic bacteria were isolated from leaf of healthy Agave tequilana plants. These
endophytic bacterial isolates were identified as Acinectobacter sp., A. baumanii,
A. bereziniae, Cronobacter sakazakii, Enterobacter hormaechei, Bacillus sp. Klebsi-
ella oxytoca, Pseudomonas sp., Enterococcus casseliflavus, Leuconostoc mesen-
teroides subsp. Mesenteroides, and Gluconobacter oxydans. The isolates were
confirmed as PGPB by their PGP activities such as nitrogen fixation, auxin produc-
tion, phosphate solubilization; Pseudomonas sp. JM9p and K. oxytoca JM26 showed
antagonism against F. oxysporum AC132 (Martı´nez-Rodrı´guez et al., 2014). Endo-
phytic bacterial strains Bacillus cereus isolated from Sinapis arvensis inhibited
growth of Rhizoctonia solani, Pythium ultimum, and Sclerotium rolfsii and also
showed chitinase activity. B. subtilis from onion tissue culture was reported to inhibit
the growth of R. solani and P. ultimum growth. B. cereus from cauliflower inhibited
the growth of R. solani and Bacillus pumilus isolated from sunflower inhibited growth
of R. solani. Interestingly, when cotton seedlings were inoculated with B. cereus,
B. subtilis, and B. pumilus, disease incidence caused by R. solani was reduced up
to 56% (Pleban et al., 1995).
4.3
Bacterial plant pathogens
4.3.1
Bacterial wilt
Ralstonia solanacearum is one of the most important causative agents of bacterial wilt
diseases in Solanaceaeus plants. It is the most important soilborne plant pathogens
causing bacterial wilt in over 200 families of plant kingdom, including tomatoes, pota-
toes, bell pepper, and eggplant, and reduce their productivity and yield (Huang et al.,
2013). Biological control of R. solanacearum (a phytopathogen of tomato) using
endophytic bacteria is one of the alternative control measures to support the sustain-
able agriculture. The endophytic bacterial strains were isolated from healthy tomato
explants and their abilities were checked to promote plant growth and suppression
bacterial wilt disease. Staphylococcus epidermidis BC4 isolate and Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens BL10 showed significantly lowered incidence of disease than con-
trol (Nawangsih et al., 2011). The endophytic actinomycetes isolated from tomato
plants collected from five different locations in Kerala (India) was examined for their
antagonistic effects against bacterial wilt pathogen in vitro. All the isolates belonged
to genus Streptomyces. Streptomyces sp. was recorded as the most efficient among the
endophytic actinomycetes isolates for the management of bacterial wilt pathogen
under in vitro conditions (Sreeja, 2012). Endophytic bacteria Pseudomonas isolates
64
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

(EB9, EB67), Enterobacter isolates (EB44, EB89), and Bacillus isolates (EC4, EC13)
were also isolated from eggplant, cucumber, and groundnut from different locations of
Goa, India. They were described to reduce the bacterial wilt incidence by more than
70%. Pseudomonas is one of the major antagonistic endophytic bacteria isolated from
eggplants. The isolate possesses the potential to be used as a biocontrol agent as well
as PGPB. Large-scale field evaluation and detailed knowledge on antagonistic mech-
anism have been provided as an effective biocontrol solution for bacterial wilt of sola-
naceous plants (Ramesh et al., 2009).
Endophytic bacterial isolates recovered from tomato explants have been shown
to exhibit antagonistic activity against tomato bacterial wilt disease (R. solanacearum).
The isolates were identified as Pseudomonas mossellii FS67, Pseudomonas fluorescence
FS167, and Pseudomonas brassicacearum FS184. P. mossellii and P. fluorescence
strains significantly reduced bacterial wilt disease under greenhouse condition. There
was a significant increase in the activity of peroxidase (POD), polyphenol oxidase
(PPO), and phenolics in tomato plants treated with FS67, FS167, and pathogen. Endo-
phytic P. mossellii FS67 and P. fluorescence FS167 had considerably more potential
to control R. solanacearum and reduced disease in greenhouse (Safdarpour and
Khodakaramian, 2018).
Eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) is one of the solanaceous crops of economic and
cultural importance and is widely cultivated worldwide. Eggplant cultivation is
severely affected by bacterial wilt caused by R. solanacearum colonizing the
xylem tissue. In all, 167 bacteria were isolated from the xylem of healthy eggplant,
chili, and Solanum torvum Sw. High biocontrol and PGB activities were noticed
for strains of Staphylococcus sp., Bacillus sp., Streptomyces sp., Enterobacter sp.,
and Agrobacterium sp. In all, 28 strains of these spp., inhibited the growth of
R. solanacearum and produced volatile and diffusible antagonistic compounds as well
as PGB substances in vitro. Antagonistic strains XB86, XB169, XB177, and XB200
expressed biocontrol efficacy greater than 85% against bacterial wilt and stimulated
up to 22% increase in shoot length in eggplant in the greenhouse experiment (Achari
and Ramesh, 2014) (Fig. 4.1).
4.3.2
Crown gall
Crown gall disease is caused by the bacterium Rhizobium radiobacter (previously
known as Agrobacterium tumefaciens). This bacterium has the widest host range of
any phytopathogen. It is capable of causing tumors virtually in all plant species, except
the monocots. Crown gall on grape, caused by the bacterium Agrobacterium vitis sp.,
occurs throughout the world where grapes are cultivated. The control of
Agrobacterium crown gall in grape is generally unsuccessful once the pathogen has
established in vineyards. Experimental trials were evaluated to observe the effective-
ness of treatments based on nonpathogenic endophytes isolated from a symptomatic
grapevines growing in vineyards with high incidence of crown gall and those endo-
phytes isolated from commercial products. Two-year trials conducted on rootstocks
treated with endophytic isolates showed the effectiveness of two bacterial endophytes,
both falling under the genus Curtobacterium, and one fungal isolate of the genus
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
65

Acremonium in reducing crown gall disease development. For the commercial biolog-
ical control agents, endophyte B. subtilis SR63 were the most effective strains against
Agrobacterium sp., and was identified as a useful biocontrol agent for the management
of crown gall disease (Ferrigo et al., 2017).
4.3.3
Bacterial leaf blight
Leaf blight caused by bacteria is a destructive disease of rice crop causing up to 50%
yield losses in conducive conditions (Sharma et al., 2017). El-shakh et al. (2015)
conducted a study to assess the efficacy of biocontrol agents against bacterial leaf
blight of rice caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae. Five endophytic
strains B. amyloliquefaciens strains A1, A3, A13, B. methylotrophicus strain A2,
and B. subtilis strain A15 and two rhizospheric Bacilli D29 and H8 were tested for
their antagonistic activities against bacterial leaf blight in vitro and in vivo. All seven
strains showed high potential of antagonistic activity against X. oryzae pv. Oryzae and
three phytopathogenic fungi in vitro. In greenhouse condition, these strains displayed
50%–57% inhibition rate against the pathogen and significantly increased plant fresh
weight up to 73% and dry weight up to 86% in treated rice plants. In addition, these
strains also demonstrated root-colonizing capacity, strong capability to produce
Endophyc
bacteria
Solanaceus plant 
inoculated with EB
Fig. 4.1 Endophytic bacteria inhibit the pathogenesis of Ralstonia sp., over the Solanaceus
plants.
66
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), siderophores, and phosphate-solubilizing potential. Real-
time quantitative PCR revealed that expression of defense-related gene including
OsAOS2, OsJMT1, OsNPR1, and OsPR1b was significantly upregulated in leaves
of Bacillus D29 treated rice plants and also suppressed leaf blight through systemic
activation of the plant defense system. The research concluded that Bacillus isolates
A13, A15, D29, and H8 support effective antagonistic activity against bacterial leaf
blight under greenhouse conditions in addition to their potential to promote growth of
rice plants. An endophytic bacterial strain B. subtilis MJMP2 was isolated from kim-
chi, a Korean Brassica campestris species. This strain showed strong antagonistic
activity against X. oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) KACC10331 (the causal agent of rice bac-
terial leaf blight disease) as well as activity against some other rice phytopathogenic
fungi. These results suggested that the strain B. subtilis MJMP2 could be used as a
biocontrol agent to control rice blight disease (Cheng et al., 2016).
4.4
Fungal plant pathogens
Fungal phytopathogens can cause enormous losses in yield and quality of crops, fruits,
and other edible plant material. Nowadays, plant disease caused by fungal pathogens
has increasingly received consumers attention as a more important issue to human
health and global (Berg and Hallmann, 2006).
4.4.1
Canker
Canker diseases are common, widespread, and destructive to a wide range of crops
including trees and shrubs. A “canker” is really a symptom of an injury often associ-
ated with an open wound that may be infected by a fungal or bacterial pathogen.
Saccharothrix yanglingensis Hhs.015 is an endophytic actinomycete isolated from
cucumber roots that had shown efficacy against apple Valsa canker as the germination
rate of Valsa mali conidia is sharply reduced. The trials showed that the recurrence
rate infected apple trees was controlled by S. yanglingensis with a high level of effi-
ciency (Yan et al., 2012; Li et al., 2012).
Fusarium circinatum the pitch canker fungus has been recently reported in South
America affecting Pinus taeda L. seedlings. The spread of this pathogen constitutes a
high risk to forestry production. The inhibitory effect of endophytic bacteria was eval-
uated with their thermostable metabolites on pitch canker fungus growth in vitro. Four
endophytic B. subtilis strains and one Burkholderia sp. isolated from P. taeda were
evaluated as biocontrol agents of F. circinatum. In this study, all strains showed an
antagonist effect on the pathogen growth arresting the mycelia at 1 cm of the edge
of the bacteria colony. Thermostable bacterial metabolites reduced over 50% fungal
growth. The results revealed that endophytic bacteria, well adapted to live in host tis-
sues, constitute a good alternative to control pitch canker fungus affecting Pinus seed-
lings (Soria et al., 2012).
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
67

4.4.2
Fusarium wilt, root rot, and damping off diseases
The pathogenic fungi such as F. oxysporum, R. solani, and Pythium aphanidermatum
have been reported to cause Fusarium wilt, root rot, and damping off diseases, respec-
tively, in various crops leading to significant losses in crop yield and growth (Siddiqui
et al., 2001; Validov et al., 2007; Scherwinski et al., 2008). Recent studies have indi-
cated that endophytic bacteria colonizing the plant’s interior can even improve plant
growth and plant health (Frommel et al., 1991; Sturz et al., 1999), thus and seem to be
excellent candidates for use as biocontrol agents against fungal phytopathogens
(Downing and Thomson, 2000; Sturz et al., 2000; Adhikari et al., 2001; Tjamos
et al., 2004). The antifungal properties of three endophytic bacterial strains,
Stenotrophomonas maltophila H8 (Xanthomonadales: Xanthomonadaceae), Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa H40 (Pseudomonadales: Pseudomonadaceae), and B. subtilis H18
(Bacillales: Bacillaceae) were evaluated against the phytopathogenic fungus R. solani
in cotton seedlings. A significant increase of seed emergence and seedling survival
with the reduction of disease severity was achieved with the endophytic bacteria-
treated plants. Moreover, there was an apparent induction of the antioxidant enzymes
[peroxidase, PPO, and catalase (CAT)] of the treated seedlings. The antagonistic
activity of the bacterial endophytes against R. solani was attributed to their capability
to produce a broad spectrum of antifungal compounds in addition to bioactive com-
pounds that can trigger the systemic resistance in the infected cotton seedlings (Selim
et al., 2016).
An endophytic bacterium, B. thuringiensis GS1, was isolated from a coarse ferns
(Pteridium aquilinum) and found to produce maximum chitinase. The ability of
B. thuringiensis GS1 was also investigated to induce resistance against R. solani in
cucumber plants. The induction of PRPs and defense-related enzymes by
B. thuringiensis GS1 might have suppressed the damping-off caused by R. solani
in cucumber plants (Seo et al., 2012). Goudjal et al. (2014) also used endophytic acti-
nomycetes for the biocontrol of R. solani causing damping off disease in tomato.
Endophytic P. fluorescens strain ENPF1 inhibited the fungal growth of stem blight
pathogen Corynespora casiicola (Berk and Curt) Wei under in vitro condition.
P. fluorescens increased the defense-related enzymes such as peroxidase, PPO, chi-
tinase, and β-1,3 glucanase in Phyllanthus amarus after challenged with Corynespora
cassiicola (Mathiyazhagan et al., 2009). Fusarium graminearum is the fungus that
causes Gibberella ear rot (GER) in modern maize and produces the mycotoxin. In
all, 215 bacterial endophytes isolated from diverse maize genotypes including wild
teosintes, traditional landraces, and modern varieties were tested for their ability to
antagonize F. graminearum in vitro. Endophytes were then tested for their ability
to suppress GER in modern maize in independent greenhouse trials. The results rev-
ealed that three candidate endophytes derived from wild teosintes were most potent in
suppressing F. graminearum in vitro and GER in a modern maize hybrid. These wild
teosinte endophytes could suppress a broad spectrum of fungal pathogens of modern
crops in vitro (Mousa et al., 2015). In all, 39 endophytic bacterial strains were isolated
from maize roots and seeds. Strains were screened for drought stress tolerance, PGB
traits, and antifungal activity. Out of these isolates, 32 could show drought tolerance
68
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

and exhibited most of the PGB traits. But, only five isolates showed antagonistic activ-
ity against fungal phytopathogens. Based on the results, 10 promising isolates namely
FTR, NFTR, FMZR9, FMZR2, MZ30V92, MRC12, MRC31, MRC33, MRC41, and
MRR2 were identified as P. aeruginosa (strains FTR and NFTR), Pseudomonas
monteilii (strain FMZR2), Pseudomonas putida (strain FMZR9), Acitenobacter
brumalii (strain MZ30V92), Enterobacter asburiae (strain MRC12), Sinorhizobium
meliloti (strain MRC31), Pseudomonas thivervalensis (strain MRC33), Pseudomonas
fulva (strain MRC41), and Pseudomonas lini (strain MRR2). All the 10 isolates
showed PGP traits and three isolates (FTR, NFTR, and MRC12) showed antifungal
activity. Thus, it was concluded that drought tolerant plant growth-promoting antag-
onistic endophytic (PGPAE) bacteria could help in plant growth promotion and dis-
ease management under drought stress (Sandhya et al., 2017).
Banana Fusarium wilt (also known as Panama disease) is one of the most destruc-
tive plant diseases. The endophytic bacterial strain Serratia marcescens ITBB B5-1
was isolated from the rubber tree. This strain exhibited a high potential for biological
control against the banana Fusarium disease. This strain also showed a control effect
against the disease. Therefore, the endophytic bacterial strain ITBB B5-1 could be
applied in the biological control of banana Fusarium wilt (Tan et al., 2015). Nine non-
pathogenic endophytic bacteria isolated from Datura metelorgans, able to colonize
the internal tissues of tomato cultivar Rio Grande, were screened for their ability to
suppress tomato Fusarium wilt disease caused by F. oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici
(FOL), and to enhance plant growth. Stenotrophomonas sp. str. S33 and Pseudomonas
sp. str. S85 isolates were found to be the most effective in decreasing Fusarium wilt
severity as compared to FOL-inoculated and untreated control. These two strains were
found to produce chitinase, protease, and pectinase but unable to produce hydrogen
cyanide. Production of IAA-like compounds, phosphate solubilizing ability, and
pectinase activity was investigated for elucidating their PGB traits and their endo-
phytic colonization ability (Rania et al., 2016).
Nonrhizobial endophytic bacteria isolated from the root nodules of chickpea (Cicer
arietinum L.) was assessed for their ability to improve plant growth and symbiotic
performance, antagonistic activity against F. solani as well as for the control of root
rot disease in chickpea under saline soil conditions. Four endophytic bacterial isolates
B. cereus NUU1, Achromobacter xylosoxidans NUU2, B. thuringiensis NUU3, and
B. subtilis NUU4 colonizing root tissue of chick pea plant are demonstrated.
B. subtilis strain NUU4 provides high potentials as a stimulator for plant growth
and as a biocontrol agent against chickpea root rot disease. A combined inoculation
of chickpea with Mesorhizobium ciceri IC53 and B. subtilis NUU4 decreased hydro-
gen peroxide concentrations and increased proline contents as compared to the uni-
noculated plants indicating an alleviation of adverse effects of salt stress. These
endophytic bacterial isolates were capable to reduce the infection rate of root rot in
chickpea caused by F. solani (Egamberdieva et al., 2017).
In all, 80 endophytic bacteria were isolated from healthy explants and fruits of
tomato plants (Lycopersicon esculentum). Four strains namely Bacillus mojavensis
BL1, Brevibacterium halotolerans BT5, B. subtilis BR8, and B. amyloliquefaciens
BF11 were selected for their antagonism against Botrytis cinerea (a plant pathogenic
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
69

fungus responsible for gray mold in many crops) and described to secrete a number
of lipopeptides with strong inhibitory effect against pathogen’s growth. These strains
also produced heterogeneous mixture of antibiotics belonging to fengycin and
surfactin as observed for B. mojavensis BL1 and B. halotolerans BT5, iturin and
surfactin for B. subtilis BR8, and bacillomycin D, fengycin, and surfactin for
B. amyloliquefaciens BF11. Based on their antifungal activity against B. cinerea, these
strains could be used for biological control of plant diseases caused by B. cinerea (Kefi
et al., 2015).
4.4.3
Clubroot
Clubroot is a common fungal disease reported in the members of the family
Brassicaceae, such as cabbages, broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, radishes, tur-
nips, stocks, wallflowers, and other plants. Clubroot disease caused by fungus
Plasmodiophora brassicae Wor. is regarded as one of the destructive diseases of
Chinese cabbage production. P. brassicae is a soilborne fungal pathogen and survives
in soils for a long time in the absence of hosts as resting spores (Naiki et al., 1978;
Ricarova et al., 2016). P. brassicae is becoming an emerging threat to the production
of crucifer vegetable crops in China. Endophytic actinomycetes may act as biocontrol
agents against Chinese cabbage clubroot. The endophytic actinomycetes were isolated
from root explants of Chinese cabbage collected from various locations in Korea.
They were classified into eight actinobacterial genera. Three genera namely Micro-
bispora, Streptomyces, and Micromonos pora were most frequently isolated. Three
of the 81 isolates were antagonistic isolates and identified as Microbisporarosea
subsp. rosea (A004 and A011) and Streptomyces olivochromogenes (A018). Their
inoculation in germinated Chinese cabbage seeds followed by transplantation to pots,
effectively suppressed the occurrence of a postinoculated strain of P. brassicae in the
pots (Lee et al., 2008) (Table 4.1).
4.5
Chemicals and synthesized products produced by
endophytic bacteria to control the phytopathogens
Plants secrete different signaling molecules against pathogens as a measure of defense
in endosphere and tackle differently with group of pathogenic, symbiotic, and neutral-
istic microorganism through these signaling molecules (Hayat, 2010). This associa-
tion of endophytes is useful for plants to interact with other organisms in a better
way. Endophytes can activate plant defense mechanisms by inducing a systemic
response in plants and trigger signaling pathways to produce extracellular metabolites
with differential ability of being higher toxic for some microorganism and these
responses are called as induced systemic resistance (ISR). As a means of biocontrol,
endophytic bacteria can elicit ISR in plants, causing reduction in disease severity and
improvement in plant stress tolerance (Khan et al., 2016).
Reports are available where some endophytic bacteria have been shown to protect
plants from herbivores while some, viz., Azorhizobium caulinodans, Burkholderia
70
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

Table 4.1 List of endophytic bacteria reported for disease management of some crops
S. No.
Endophytic
bacterial strains
Plant
Disease
References
Vegetables
1.
Bacillus subtilis
subsp.
Bacillus
atrophaeus,
B. tequilensis,
B. subtilis subsp.
spizizenii,
Streptomyces
cyaneofuscatus,
S. flavofuscus,
S. parvus,
S. acrimycini
Bean
Anthracnose
disease
(Colletotrichum
lindemuthianum)
Gholami et al.
(2013)
2.
Serratia strain
B17B,
Enterobacter strain
E, Bacillus strains
IMC8, Y, Ps, Psl
and Prt
Bell Pepper
(Capsicum
annuum L.)
Phytophthora
Blight
Irabor and
Mmbaga
(2017)
3.
Pseudomonas
putida Pt12,
Pseudomonas sp.,
Pt13
Black
pepper
(Piper
nigrum L.)
Black pepper root
rot disease
Nascimento
et al. (2015)
4.
Pseudomonas
fluorescens PF-1
Bacillus subtilis
strain BS-7
Cauliflower
Black rot disease
Singh et al.
(2010)
5.
Lysinibacillus sp.,
Bacillus subtilis,
Azotobacter
chrococcum,
Pseudomonas
cepacea
Chili
Bacterial wilt
disease (Ralstonia
solanacearum)
Istifadah et al.
(2017)
6.
Bacillus
pseudomycoides
NBRC 101232
B. thuringiensis
ATCC 10792
B. mycoides strain
273
Chili
pepper
Bacterial wilt
(Ralstonia syzigii)
Fusarium wilt
Yanti et al.
(2018)
7.
Ochrobactrum
pseudintermedium
(CB361-80)
Pantoea
agglomerans
(CC372-83)
Cucumber
Angular leaf spot
Akbaba and
Ozaktan (2018)
Continued

Table 4.1 Continued
S. No.
Endophytic
bacterial strains
Plant
Disease
References
8.
Bacillus sp.
Cucumber
Downy mildew
Sun et al.
(2013)
9.
Pseudomonas spp.
Serratia spp.
Oilseed
rape
(Brassica
napus L.
cv. Casino)
and tomato
Soil-borne
diseases
Nejad and
Johnson (2000)
10.
Alcaligenes
faecalis subsp.
faecalis str. S8
Tomato
Fusarium wilt
disease
Abdallah et al.
(2016)
11.
Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens
FBZ24
Tomato
Fusarium wilt
disease
Elanchezhiyan
et al. (2018)
12.
P. fluorescens
63-28
Tomato
Bacterial wilt
pathogen
(R. solanacearum)
Vanitha and
Umesha (2011)
13.
Staphylococcus
epidermidis BL4,
Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens
BL10
Tomato
Bacterial wilt
pathogen
(R. solanacearum)
Nawangsih
et al. (2011)
14.
Enterobacter
cloacae SM10
Spinach
Fusarium wilt
disease
Tsuda et al.
(2001)
Cereals
15.
Pseudomonas
fluorescens strain
Endo2 and Endo35
Black gram
(Vigna
mungo L.
Hepper)
Dry root rot
Karthikeyan
et al. (2006a,b)
16.
Bacillus subtilis
DZSY21
Maize
Southern corn leaf
blight
Ding et al.
(2017)
17.
Bacillus subtilis, B.
amyloliquefaciens
(FZB 24), EPB 9,
EPB10, EPCO
29 and EPCO 78
Rice
Bacterial leaf
blight, sheath
blight
Nagendran
et al. (2013,
2014)
18.
Streptomyces spp.
(AB131-1 and
LBR02)
Rice
Bacterial leaf
blight
Hastuti et al.
(2012)
19.
Bacillus
tequilensis
GYLH001
Rice
Rice blast fungus
Li et al. (2018)
72
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

cepacia, E. cloacae, Klebsiella variicola, and P. putida are responsible for the synthesis
of novel and useful secondary products (Strobel et al., 2004). Several bacterial strains
belonging to genera Pseudomonas and Bacillus have also been reported for their ability
to control crown gall disease (Tolba and Soliman, 2013; Frikha-Gargouri et al., 2017).
4.5.1
Phytohormones
Endophytic bacterial strains have several beneficial effects on their host plant, includ-
ing growth-promoting activity, modulation of plant metabolism, and phytohormone
production that leads to adaptation to environmental abiotic or biotic stresses. Use
of endophytic bacteria presents a special interest for the development of agricultural
applications that ensure improved crop performance under abiotic or biotic stress con-
ditions and enhanced disease resistance (Miliute et al., 2015).
Plant hormones as key chemical constituents are equipped with the ability to pro-
vide tolerance against number of abiotic and biotic stresses. They serve as the effectors
Table 4.1 Continued
S. No.
Endophytic
bacterial strains
Plant
Disease
References
20.
Pseudomonas
fluorescens GRP3
Rice
Sheath blight
Pathak et al.
(2004)
21.
Bacillus
megaterium
(BM1), Bacillus
subtilis (BS43,
BSM0 y BSM2)
Wheat
Fusarium head
blight
Pan et al.
(2015)
22.
Bacillus velezensis
LM2303
Wheat
Fusarium head
blight
Chen et al.
(2018)
23.
Bacillus subtilis
strain E1R-J
Wheat
Wheat powdery
mildew
Gao et al.
(2015)
Other crops
24.
Bacillus
lentimorbus Dutky
TG4-Ia, B. cereus
TF9-Ia
Coffee
Coffee leaf rust
Shiomi et al.
(2006)
25.
Bacillus strains
(EPCO 102 and
EPCO 16) and
Pseudomonas
fluorescens strain
Pf1
Cotton
Cotton bollworm
Rajendran et al.
(2007)
26.
Pseudomonas
fluorescens PICF7
Olive
Verticillium wilt
Cabanas et al.
(2014)
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
73

molecule and known to be responsible for signal perception, transduction, cellular
homeostasis, and gene expression. As a consequence, they play an important role
in plant responses and resistance against plant diseases (Bari and Jones, 2009). The
hormones, auxin, IAA, and ABA, are essential regulators of a multitude of biological
functions, including plant responses to biotic and abiotic stressors. Both IAA and
ABA are involved in the P. fluorescens-mediated control of Fusarium head blight dis-
ease of barley (Hordeum vulgare) plant (Petti et al., 2012). Endophytic bacteria des-
ignated as ARBR3, AM65R1, IR64L1, ARBS2, AM65S2, IR64R1, and JERR2 and
isolated from aerobic rice varieties have been reported to possess the potential to pro-
duce phytohormones like IAA, gibberellins (GA), and cytokinin (Shylla et al., 2016).
Endophyte B. subtilis DZSY21 strain has been isolated from Eucommia ulmoides
oliv. Leaves and expression of key plant genes involved in regulation of salicylic acid
(SA) or jasmonic acid (JA)/ET pathways, the defense-related genes PR1 and LOX
were also demonstrated to express in the host plant leaves after treatment with
B. subtilis. The results concluded the existence of an induced systemic response that
is dependent on the SA and JA pathways. Thus, authors hypothesized that the strain
DZSY21 inhibits pathogenicity of Bipolaris maydis (causing agent of Southern corn
leaf blight and stalk rot) by producing antifungal lipopeptides and activating an
induced systemic response through SA- and JA-dependent signaling pathways. The
work described that endophytic bacteria DZSY21, after inoculation into plants, were
helpful in reducing disease severity (Ding et al., 2017).
4.5.2
Siderophore
Siderophores are small organic molecules produced by microbes including endo-
phytic bacteria, under iron-limiting conditions. Under physiological pH conditions,
microbes synthesize siderophores which have high affinity for ferric iron. These ferric
iron-siderophore complexes are then transported to cytosol. Recently, siderophores
have drawn much attention due to its potential roles in different fields. Siderophores
have application in microbial ecology to enhance the growth of several unculturable
microorganisms and thus can alter the microbial communities. In the field of agricul-
ture, different types of siderophores promote the growth of several plant species and
increase the crop yield. They act as a potential biocontrol agent against harmful plant
pathogens and hold the ability to substitute hazardous pesticides. Siderophores can
detect the iron content in different environments and may serve as potential biosensor
(Saha et al., 2016) for field applications.
Many endophytic bacteria suppress the growth of deleterious microbes by produc-
tion of siderophore (Husen, 2003). Siderophores are growth inhibitors of various phy-
topathogenic fungi, such as Phytophthora parasitica, Phythiumu ltimum, F.
oxysporum, and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Seuk et al., 1988; Hamdan et al., 1991;
Mc Loughlin et al., 1992; Buysens et al., 1996). Kloepper et al. (1980) first demon-
strated the importance of siderophore production as a mechanism of biological control
of Erwinia carotovora through several PGB P. fluorescens strains like A1, BK1,
TL3B1, and B10; a direct correlation was established in vitro between siderophore
synthesis in fluorescent pseudomonads and their capacity to inhibit germination of
74
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

chlamydospores of F. oxysporum (Sneh et al., 1984; Elad and Baker, 1985). As with
the antibiotics, mutants incapable of producing some siderophores, such as
pyoverdine, were reduced in their capacity to suppress different plant pathogens
(Keel et al., 1989; Loper and Buyer, 1991).
Many types of siderophore such as hydroxymate, catecholets, and carboxylate are
produced by different bacteria. Bacillus spp. isolated from potato is shown to produce
siderophore of both catecholets and salicylate type. Various strains of Bacillus spp.
have been tested for pathogen inhibition capability in a dual culture manner. The
results showed the ability of inhibition of pathogen isolated from banana wilt disease.
From the result tested, the researchers found Bacillus niabensis strain PT-32-1,
B. subtilis strain SWI 16b, B. subtilis strain HPC 21, B. mojavensis strain JCEN3,
and B. subtilis strain HPC24 with differential capabilities in suppressing pathogen
(Kesaulya et al., 2017). Siderophores represent one of the major mechanisms of bac-
teria that could be employed for biological control of plant diseases. Both plant path-
ogenic fungi and bacteria are reported to be inhibited by siderophore-producing
biocontrol agents (Shanmugaiah et al., 2016).
4.5.3
Nanoparticles
Nanotechnology as a promising technology could help in meeting the global demands
for sustainable agriculture and prevention of crop losses due to disease. Several sci-
entists have concentrated their efforts on the development of nontarget, biodegrad-
able, and ecofriendly nano-formulations showing strong biological activities
against plant pathogens (Adetunji and Neera, 2017). In the recent years, nanotechnol-
ogy has been increasingly applied to the development of novel antimicrobials for the
management of phytopathogenic bacteria and fungi affecting agricultural crops.
Use of nanoparticles in plant disease management is a novel and modern approach
that may prove very effective in future with the progress of application aspect of nano-
technology (Ladner et al., 2008). Several endophytic bacteria may synthesize metallic
and their oxides nanoparticles that may be used successfully for the plant disease man-
agement. Among the different types of nanoparticles, AgNPs have been used as effec-
tive biocides against a variety of plant pathogens. The endophytic actinomycete
Streptomyces capillispiralis Ca-1 was isolated from Convolvulus arvensis L., a medic-
inal plant collected from Bahariya Oasis—Giza Governorate, Egypt. The isolated acti-
nomycetes were able to synthesize copper nanoparticles. The biosynthesized CuNPs
showed various biomedical applications against infectious microorganisms, biocon-
trol of phytopathogenic fungi, and nasty insects (Hassan et al., 2018). Copper
nanoparticles showed significant antifungal activity against plant pathogenic fungi
such as Phoma destructiva (DBT-66), Alternaria alternata (MTCC no. 6572),
F. oxysporum (MTCC no. 1755), and Curvularia lunata (MTCC no. 2030). The syn-
thesized copper nanoparticles can be used as a novel antifungal agent in agriculture to
control the plant pathogenic fungi (Kanhed et al., 2014). Endophytic Streptomyces
coelicolor strain E72 isolated from Ocimum sanctum plant synthesized magnesium
oxide nanoparticles (MgONP) (El-Moslamy, 2018). The effects of MgONP on disease
resistance in tomato plants against R. solanacearum, as well as its antibacterial
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
75

activity were evaluated. The roots of tomato seedlings were inoculated with
R. solanacearum and then immediately treated with MgONP; the treated plants
showed very little inhibition of bacterial wilt disease in tomato (Imada et al., 2016).
Increased uses of synthetic pesticides were intensified to increase agriculture yield
in different crops in different agroecological zones. Pesticides are ineffective to solve
the problem of nematodes, as nematodes population increased even after the nemati-
cides application for several months. Due to increased selection pressure, new races of
nematodes have into existence. So, in order to have an effective management,
nanoparticles may offer a lot of potentials to effectively control nematodes population
through its targeted approach. Most importantly, nanoparticle mediates higher pene-
tration of chemicals pesticides with a minimum concentration of chemical used, as
they penetrate easily through the cell wall and produces maximum effect. Gold
nanoparticles kill nematodes itself, but when used along with synthetic nematicides,
their efficiency is significantly increased (Thakur and Shirkot, 2017).
4.5.4
Phosphate solubilization
Phosphorous (P) is an essential nutrient element after nitrogen. It is unavailable to
plants because in the soil it is mostly present in the fixed form. Those bacteria having
the phosphate-solubilizing capacity are called as PSB. Many endophytic bacteria have
the capacity to solubilize phosphate.
Amendment of soil with decomposable organic matter or PGB microorganisms is
one of the cheapest, hazard free, and eco-friendly effective methods of modifying soil
environment. Sun and Huang (1985) had rightly observed that continuous extensive
agricultural practices that depend heavily on use of chemical fertilizers have resulted
in loss of crops. Besides solubilizing P, some PSM have also demonstrated their poten-
tial application as biocontrol agents against some plant pathogens. PSB manage the
pathogens by producing antifungal compounds [such as phenylalanine ammonia lyase
(PAL), phenolics, and flavonoids], siderophores, antibiotics, hydrogen cyanide, and
lytic enzymes all of which inhibit the growth of plant pathogens (Gupta et al.,
2014). Phosphate-solubilizing endophytic bacteria identified as Pantoea aananatis,
P. putida, Brevibacillus agri, B. subtilis, and Bacillus megaterium. P. fluorescens
CHA0 and isolated from Oryza sativa were reported to solubilize phosphate, promote
the growth of various crop plants, and protect against root diseases caused by patho-
genic fungi. The main mechanism of disease suppression by this strain is the produc-
tion of the antifungal compounds 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) and pyoluteorin
(PLT) (Werra et al., 2009; Borah et al., 2017).
4.6
Bacterial endophyte in plant defense management
The endophytic community is subdivided as “obligate,” “facultative,” or “passive”
endophytes according to the different internal mechanisms and their mode of interac-
tion used to colonize a host plant (Gaiero et al., 2013; Andreote and Durrer, 2014).
Starting from endophyte interaction with plant parts to disease development, there
76
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

are cascade of physiological steps involved in signal transduction leading to induced
resistance in plants. It has been already reported that initially, the density of bacteria in
the rhizosphere and rhizoplane is always higher than in the bulk soil in terms of lack of
substances secreted from the roots of plants (Rosenblueth and Martinez-Romero,
2006). The role of bacterial endophytes in SAR has been studied by Kloepper and
Ryu (2006). Reports available about some endophytic bacteria isolated from mustard
and tomato plants that completely inhibited the mycelial growth of Verticillium
dahliae and Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici were represented to enhance the
plant height and shoot dry weight by more than 75% (Nejad and Johnson, 2000).
Nandhini et al. (2012) isolated endophytic bacteria from root, stem, leaves, and fruits
and tested for their antagonistic activity against Fusarium wilt disease in tomato. It has
been found that strain B. pumilus SE34 triggered ISR in a sequence of steps starting
with elaboration of structural barriers, production of toxic substances (e.g., phenolics
and phytoalexinc), accumulation of molecules (e.g., chitinase), and hydrolytic
enzymes (e.g., β-1,3-glucanases), which contributed in release of oligosaccharides
that subsequentially stimulated other defense reactions (Benhamou et al., 1998).
The routes and mechanism of endophyte-plant interaction was assessed earlier using
autofluorescent protein marker (AFP), using standard microbiological enumeration
associated with plant surfaces and in planta protein (AFP) by Tombolini et al.
(1997) and Tombolini and Jansson (1998) using β-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter sys-
tem by James et al. (2002). Adaption strategies by various pathogen in host cells have
been used to decipher the expression in vivo expression technology (IVET) and
recombination in vivo expression of bacterial gene in the rhizosphere and
phyllosphere (Preston et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2006).
4.6.1
Defense-related enzymes
Plant disease management is mainly based on the use of fungicides, bactericides, and
insecticides that are chemical compounds toxic to phytopathogens, causative agents,
or vectors of plant diseases. Defense-related enzymes or defense enzymes such as per-
oxidase, PPO, phenylalanine, ammonia lyase, chitinase, and β-1,3-glucanase are
related to resistance induction in plants (Gajanayaka et al., 2014; Prasannath and
De Costa, 2015). The intensification of production of phenolics, known as defense
molecules of plants against pathogens and insects, is indicated by an increase in
PAL activity in damaged plant tissues (Bi and Felton, 1995).
Chitinases are large group of defense-related enzymes and also one of the impor-
tant plant PRP that degrades chitin, it improves plant defense system against chitin
containing phytopathogens ( Jalil et al., 2015). Bacterially produced chitinases have
been widely demonstrated as inhibitors of fungal growth and can, therefore, be effec-
tive in controlling phytopathogenic fungal diseases (Ordentlich et al., 1988).
The 14 endophytic bacteria (M1ccl to M14ccl) isolated from leaves of Chinese cab-
bage cv. Yamico were assayed for chitinase activities in fluorometric assay with
4-methylumbelliferyl substrates. The highest chitinase activity was observed in the
isolate M11ccl (Daulagala and Allan-Atkins, 2015). The endophyte Streptomyces
and its potential in chitinase production and pathogen inhibition was calculated and
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
77

further confirmed on Colletotrichum sublineolum cell walls by scanning electron
microscopic investigations (Quecine et al., 2008). The chitinase enzymes produced
by endophytic Streptomyces hygroscopicus was purified and its antifungal activity
was investigated against fungal phytopathogens. The chitanase were found to inhibit
the growth of phytopathogenic fungi such as R. solani, F. oxysporum, A. alternata,
Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus flavus, Sclerotinia scleotiorum, P. parasitica, and
B. cinerea (Haggag and Abdallh, 2012). The endophytic strain B. cereus 65 was iso-
lated from Sinapsis arvensis, and was reported to produce chitinase enzyme. B. cereus
65 directly applied to soil was exhibited to significantly protect the cotton seedlings
from root rot disease caused by R. solani (Pleban et al., 1997).
Bacillus spp. isolates BM1, BM2, BM3, BM4, BM5, and BM6 were evaluated to
determine their antagonistic activity toward F. moniliforme in maize seeds. All Bacil-
lus spp. isolates suppressed the growth of F. moniliforme in vitro and in maize seed
trials. The isolate BM2 was most effective endophyte to control the disease and the
lowest was noted for BM5. All Bacillus spp. isolates produced chitinase, but isolates
BM2 and BM3 had the highest chitinase activity. These results indicated that Bacillus
spp. isolates have antagonistic activities toward F. moniliforme and have a potential
for utilization as a biocontrol agent. The possible role of chitinase secreted by Bacillus
spp. isolates in the suppression of the fungal infection is also documented (Bressan
and Figueiredo, 2010).
Chitinase and β-1,3-glucanase are responsible for the hydrolysis of cell wall com-
ponents (Ebrahim et al., 2011). The endophytic actinomycetes Streptomyces aure-
ofaciens CMUAc130 were screened for their potential for chitinase production. It
was the most effective isolate selected for a more detailed study of chitinase produc-
tion and its effectiveness in fungal cell wall lysis (Taechowisan et al., 2003).
Bacterial blight disease caused by Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. Malvacearum
(Xam) is a major problem in cotton crops yield. The effect of inducing systemic resis-
tance against Xam in cotton with biologically active endophytic strains Bacillus EPCO
102 and EPCO 16 and P. fluorescens Pf1, with or without the addition of chitin, was
tested under greenhouse conditions. The bacterial strains applied through seed, soil,
and foliar spray, significantly reduced bacterial blight disease. The addition of chitin
to the bio-formulation reduced disease incidence. Bacillus EPCO 102 with chitin led
to the lowest bacterial blight incidence. The bacterial strains also caused higher levels
of defense enzymes such as chitinase, peroxidase, PPO, phenylalanine ammonia-
lyase, and phenol in cotton crop. In addition, the endophytic strains of Bacillus
increased cotton yield under greenhouse conditions (Rajendran et al., 2006). Endo-
phytic bacteria B. subtilis (EPC 5) was isolated and tested in vitro along with
P. fluorescens (Pf1) and the fungus Trichoderma viride (Tv1) against Ganoderma
lucidum (Leys) Karst, the causal agent of basal stem rot on coconut palm. The endo-
phytic bacterial strains namely EPC 5 and EPC 8 showed higher germination percent-
age, root and shoot length, and more inhibition against G. lucidum as compared to
control. The B. subtilis (EPC 5) along with P. fluorescens (Pf1) and T. viride (Tv1)
has been tried as bioconsortia against basal stem rot disease. The soil application
of bio-consortia enhanced the coconut saplings growth and showed higher induction
of defense enzymes like peroxidase, PPO, PAL, and phenols when challenged with
78
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

pathogen (Rajendran et al., 2015). The effects of B. subtilis CBR05 inoculation on
bacterial spot disease severity and the induction of defense-related enzymes response
in tomato are also presented. Tomato leaves were evaluated to determine the activities
of antioxidant enzymes [superoxide dismutase (SOD), CAT, peroxidase (POD), and
PPO] and the malondialdehyde (MDA) content. A reduction in bacterial spot disease
was observed in plants treated with B. subtilis as compared to uninoculated controls.
A significant increase in antioxidant enzymes activities was also observed in plants
treated with B. subtilis after 24 h inoculation as compared with noninoculated path-
ogen
control and
mock-inoculated controls. During
72 h after inoculation,
B. subtilis inoculated plants resulted in significant increase of SOD, POD, and PPO
activities as compared to noninoculated pathogen control. MDA content was induced
by pathogen infection, and its amount in B. subtilis inoculated plants was significantly
lower than pathogen control. This report concluded that early increases in antioxidant
enzymes and the reduction in MDA content with B. subtilis inoculation may play a
pivotal role in mitigating oxidative stress thereby ISR against bacterial spot disease
in tomato (Karthikeyan et al., 2006b; Chandrasekaran and Chun, 2016). The
endobacterium S. marcescens strain UPM39B3 preinoculated with banana plantlets
induced the production of host defense enzymes such as peroxidase, PPO, PAL, total
soluble phenols, and lignothioglycolic acid. The levels of defense enzymes showed
higher level in plantlets pretreated with the strain UPM39B3 as compared to the con-
trol. The production of host defense enzymes benefitted the crop plants as they may
have a considerable role in suppressing Fusarium wilt disease in the banana plantlets.
The potential application of S. marcescens strain UPM39B3 as a biological control
agent for Fusarium wilt disease management in bananas, hence may reduce disease
severity via stimulation of host defense enzymes (Ting et al., 2010).
4.6.2
Pathogenesis-related proteins
PRPs are defined as proteins encoded by the host plant induced under pathological
conditions. PRPs are a set of novel proteins associated with host defense mainly in
incompatible interaction which impede the pathogen progress. These proteins display
high degree of pathogen specificity and are coordinated at the level of transcription. In
the total soluble protein, they are accumulated to very high concentrations and in few
cases may accumulate up to 10% of the total protein content. PRPs are well known for
their role in acquired resistance that is induced in association with necrotic lesions in
plants (Golshani et al., 2015).
Some strains of saprophytic and endophytic bacteria and fungi also induce PR
activity and eventually increase disease resistance. PRPs can be detected in almost
whole parts of the plants and large number of PRPs belonging to different classes hav-
ing different functions can be present in a single plant species. These proteins display
high degree of pathogen specificity and are coordinated at the level of transcription.
Induction of PR’s when measured on a time scale is a late event and its effect on the
early infection is limited. Application of chemicals or microbial-derived metabolites
that mimic the effect of pathogen infection induces both PRPs and acquired resistance.
Numerous PRPs have been detected in rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, barley, tomato,
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
79

pearl millet, bean, chickpea, soybean, pepper, sunflower, carrot, pepper, grape vine,
alfalfa, celery, rubber, and many other plants. The localization and distribution
of the PRPs is related directly to the method and nature of the pathogen infection.
The PRPs have been classified into various families based on the shared sequence
homology. PRPs can also be grouped into different classes based on the migration
in the native PAGE, reaction with specific antisera and mRNA probes. Furthermore,
they have also been classified on the basis of their biology (Sudisha et al., 2012).
The endophytic bacteria B. amyloliquefaciens strain TB2 had an excellent control
effect on litchi downy blight disease caused by Peronophthora litchii. The
control effect was pronounced when inoculated with strain TB2. The endophytic bac-
teria B. amyloliquefaciens was represented to increase the activities of PRPs.
The activities of 1,3-glucanase, chitinase, and the contents of glutathione and ascorbic
acid were comparatively higher than the control after 6 days of inoculation with the
strain TB2 (Cai et al., 2010). Few chemicals and synthesized products by endophytic
bacteria inhibit the phytopathogens are shown in Fig. 4.2.
4.7
Conclusion
Endophytic bacteria are able to increase crop yields, assist in phytoremediation of
environmental contaminants, produce novel substances, and enhance soil nitrogen
content through diazotrophic activity. All these properties have proved bacterial
PGP traits
ABA
Nanoparticles
Siderophore
IAA
P- solubilization
EB
Indirect route 
Direct route 
EB- endophytic bacteria
ABA- abscisic acid
IAA- indole-acetic-acid
Defense enzymes
PR proteins
Isolated EB
PGP traits 
helps in 
disease 
management 
of  the plant
Phytohormone
Fig. 4.2 Endophytic bacteria to control the phytopathogens via direct and indirect route.
80
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

endophytes as vital players in agroecosystem. Exploitation of endophytic bacteria and
their interactions with plants in multiple ways may results into the enhancement of
plant health and thus could add to low input or high cost benefit ratio in sustainable
agriculture. However, the biotechnological potential of these microbes could be better
estimated by analyzing their modes and constraints with host plant interaction. The
challenge in such study areas may be managed by keeping microbial communities
in favor of plant colonization through beneficial endophytic bacteria as well as simul-
taneously avoiding harmful endophytes or other associated microbial forms.
Acknowledgments
The author (M.S.) thanks to DST-Inspire for fellowship in the form of JRF/SRF and also to the
head, Centre of Advanced Study in Botany for providing facilities.
References
Abdallah, R.A.B., Trabelsi, B.M., Nefzi, A., Khiareddine, H.J., Remadi, M.D., 2016. Isolation
of endophytic bacteria from Withania somnifera and assessment of their ability to suppress
fusarium wilt disease in tomato and to promote plant growth. J. Plant Pathol. Microbiol.
7, 352.
Achari, G.A., Ramesh, R., 2014. Diversity, biocontrol, and plant growth promoting abilities of
xylem residing bacteria from Solanaceous crops. Int. J. Microbiol. 296521, 1–14.
Adetunji, C.O., Neera, B.S., 2017. Impacts of biogenic nanoparticle on the biological control of
plant pathogens. Adv. Biotech. Microbiol. 7 (3), 555711.
Adhikari, T.B., Joseph, C.M., Yang, G., Phillips, D.A., Nelson, L.M., 2001. Evaluation of bac-
teria isolated from rice for plant growth promotion and biological control of seedling dis-
ease of rice. Can. J. Microbiol. 47, 916–924.
Akbaba, M., Ozaktan, H., 2018. Biocontrol of angular leaf spot disease and colonization of
cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) by endophytic bacteria. Egypt. J. Biol. Pest Control
28 (14), 1–10.
Akkopru, A., C¸ akar, K., Husseini, A., 2018. Effects of endophytic bacteria on disease and
growth in plants under biotic stress. YYU J. Agric. Sci. 28 (2), 200–208.
Andreote, F.D., Durrer, T.G.A., 2014. Exploring interactions of plant microbiomes. Sci. Agric.
71 (6), 528–539.
Bari, R., Jones, J.D., 2009. Role of plant hormones in plant defense responses. Plant Mol. Biol.
69, 473–488.
Benhamou, N., Kloepper, J.W., Tuzun, S., 1998. Induction of resistance against Fusarium wilt
of tomato by combination of chitosan with an endophytic bacterial strain: ultrastructure
and cytochemistry of the host response. Planta 204 (2), 153–168.
Berg, G., Hallmann, J., 2006. Control of plant pathogenic fungi with bacterial endophytes. In: -
Schulz, B.J.E., Boyle, C.J.C., Sieber, T.N. (Eds.), Microbial Root Endophytes. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, pp. 53–69.
Berg, G., Eberl, L., Hartmann, A., 2005. The rhizosphere as a reservoir for opportunistic human
pathogenic bacteria. Environ. Microbiol. 7, 1673–1685.
Bi, J.L., Felton, G.W., 1995. Foliar oxidative and insect herbivory: primary compounds, sec-
ondary metabolites, and reactive oxygen species as components of induced resistance.
J. Chem. Ecol. 21, 1511–1530.
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
81

Borah, M., Das, P., Pathak, S.S., Boro, R.C., Barooah, M., 2017. Phosphate solubilization by
endophytic bacteria isolated from Oryza sativa. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci.
6 (10), 2713–2721.
Bressan, W., Figueiredo, J.E., 2010. Chitinolytic Bacillus Spp. isolates antagonistic to Fusarium
Moniliforme in maize. J. Plant Pathol. 92 (2), 343–347.
Buysens, S., Heungens, K., Poppe, J., Hofte, M., 1996. Involvement of pyochelin and pioverdin in
suppression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 7NSK2. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62 (3), 865–871.
Cabanas, C.G.L., Schiliro`, E., Corredor, A.V., Blanco, J.M., 2014. The biocontrol endophytic
bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens PICF7 induces systemic defense responses in aerial
tissues upon colonization of olive roots. Front. Microbiol. 5, 427.
Cai, X.Q., Lin, N., Chen, W., Hu, F.P., 2010. Control effects on litchi downy blight disease by
endophytic bacterial strain Tb2 and its pathogenesis-related proteins. Acta Hortic.
863, 631–636.
Canny, M., Huang, C., 1993. What is in the intercellular spaces of roots? Evidence from the
cryo-analytical-scanning electron microscope. Physiol. Plant. 87 (4), 561–568.
Canny, M., McCully, M., 1988. The xylem sap of maize roots: its collection, composition and
formation. Funct. Plant Biol. 15 (4), 557–566.
Chandrasekaran, M., Chun, S., 2016. Induction of defense related enzymes in tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum) plants treated with Bacillus subtilis CBR05 against Xanthomonas cam-
pestris pv. Vesicatoria. Biocontrol Sci. Technol. 26 (10), 1366–1378.
Chen, L., Heng, J., Qin, S., Bian, K., 2018. A comprehensive understanding of the biocontrol
potential of Bacillus velezensis LM2303 against Fusarium head blight. PLoS ONE. 13(6)
e0198560.
Cheng, J., Jaiswal, K.S., Yang, S.H., Suh, J.W., 2016. Endophytic Bacillus subtilis MJMP2
from Kimchi inhibits Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, the pathogen of Rice bacterial blight
disease. J. Appl. Biol. Chem. 59 (2), 149–154.
Compant, S., Clement, C., Sessitsch, A., 2010. Plant growth-promoting bacteria in the rhizo-
and endosphere of plants: their role, colonization, mechanisms involved and prospects
for utilization. Soil Biol. Biochem. 42, 669–678.
Daulagala, P.W.H.K.P., Allan-Atkins, E.A., 2015. Chitinolytic activities of endophytic bacteria
isolated from symptom-free Chinese cabbage leaves. Asian J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
Environ. Sci. 17 (3), 603–609.
de Melo Pereira, G.V., Magalha˜es, K.T., Lorenzetii, E.R., Souza, T.P., Schwan, R.F., 2012.
A multiphasic approach for the identification of endophytic bacterial in strawberry fruit
and their potential for plant growth promotion. Microb. Ecol. 63 (2), 405–417.
Ding, T., Su, B., Chen, X., Xie, S., Gu, S., Wang, Q., Huang, D., Jiang, H., 2017. An endophytic
bacterial strain isolated from Eucommia ulmoides inhibits southern corn leaf blight. Front.
Microbiol. 8, 903.
Downing, K.J., Thomson, J.A., 2000. Introduction of the Serratia marcescens chiA gene into an
endophytic Pseudomonas fluorescens for the biocontrol of phytopathogenic fungi. Can. J.
Microbiol. 46, 363–369.
Dudeja, S., Giri, R., Saini, R., Suneja-Madan, P., Kothe, E., 2012. Interaction of endophytic
microbes with legumes. J. Basic Microbiol. 52, 248–260.
Dutta, D., Puzari, K.C., Gogoi, R., Dutta, P., 2014. Endophytes: exploitation as a tool in plant
protection. Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol. 57 (5), 621–629.
Ebrahim, S., Usha, K., Singh, B., 2011. Pathogenesis related (PR) proteins in plant defense
mechanism. In: Mendez-Vilas, A. (Ed.), Science Against Microbial Pathogens: Commu-
nicating Current Research and Technological Advances. In: Microbiology Series No. 3,
vol. 1. Formatex, Spain, pp. 1043–1054.
82
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

Egamberdieva, D., Wirth, S.J., Shurigin, V.V., Hashem, A., Abd-Allah, E.F., 2017. Endophytic
bacteria improve plant growth, symbiotic performance of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.)
and induce suppression of root rot caused by Fusarium solani under salt stress. Front.
Microbiol. 8, 1887.
Elad, Y., Baker, R., 1985. Influence of trace amounts of cations and iderophore- producing
pseudomonads on chlamydospore germination of Fusarium oxysporum. Ecol. Epidemiol.
75, 1047–1052.
Elanchezhiyan, K., Keerthana, U., Nagendran, K., Prabhukarthikeyan, S.R., Prabakar, K.,
Raguchander,
T.,
Karthikeyan,
G.,
2018.
Multifaceted
benefits
of
Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens strain FBZ24 in the management of wilt disease in tomato caused by
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 103, 92–101.
El-Moslamy, S., 2018. Bioprocessing strategies for cost-effective large-scale biogenic synthesis
of nano-MgO from endophytic Streptomyces coelicolor strain E72 as an anti-multidrug
resistant pathogens agent. Sci. Rep. 8, 3820.
El-shakh, A.S.A., Kakar, K.U., Wang, X., Almoneafy, A.A., Ojaghian, M.R., Li, B., Anjum, S.I.,
Xie, G., 2015. Controlling bacterial leaf blight of rice and enhancing the plant growth with
endophytic and rhizobacterial Bacillus strains. Toxicol. Environ. Chem. 97 (6), 766–785.
Etminani, F., Harighi, B., 2018. Isolation and identification of endophytic bacteria with plant
growth promoting activity and biocontrol potential from Wild Pistachio Trees. Plant Pat-
hol. J. 34 (3), 208–217.
Ferrigo, D., Causin, R., Raiola, A., 2017. Effect of potential biocontrol agents selected among
grapevine endophytes and commercial 2 products on crown gall disease. Biol. Control
62, 821–833.
Frikha-Gargouri, O., Ben Abdallah, D., Bhar, I., Tounsi, S., 2017. Antibiosis and bmyB gene
presence as prevalent traits for the selection of efficient Bacillus biocontrol agents against
crown gall disease. Front. Plant Sci. 8, 1363.
Frommel, M.I., Nowak, J., Lazarovits, J., 1991. Growth enhancement and developmental mod-
ifications of in vitro grown potato (Solanum tuberosum ssp. tuberosum) as affected by a
nonfluorescent Pseudomonas sp. Plant Physiol. 96, 928–936.
Gaiero, J.R., McCall, C.A., Thompson, K.A., Day, N.J., Best, A.S., Dunfield, K.E., 2013. Inside
the root microbiome: bacterial root endophytes and plant growth promotion. Am. J. Bot.
100 (9), 1738–1750.
Gajanayaka, G.M.D.R., Prasannath, K., De Costa, D.M., 2014. Variation of chitinase and β-1,3-
glucanase activities in tomato and chilli tissues grown under different crop management
practices and agroecological regions. In: Proceedings of the Peradeniya University Inter-
national Research Sessions. vol. 18. p. 519.
Gao, X., Gong, Y., Huo, Y., Han, Q., Kang, Z., Huang, L., 2015. Endophytic Bacillus subtilis strain
e1r-j is a promising biocontrol agent for wheat powdery mildew. BioMed Res. 462645, 1–8.
Gholami, M., Khakvar, R., Zad, N.A., 2013. Application of endophytic bacteria for controlling
anthracnose disease (Colletotrichum lindemuthianum) on bean plants. Arch. Phytopathol.
Plant Protect. 46 (15), 1831–1838.
Golshani, F., Fakheri, B.A., Behshad, E., Vashvaei, R.M., 2015. PRs proteins and their mech-
anism in plants. Biol. Forum 7 (1), 477–495.
Gond, S.K., Bergen, M.S., Torres, M.S., White Jr., J.F., 2014. Endophytic Bacillus spp. produce
antifungal lipopeptides and induce host defence gene expression in maize. Microbiol. Res.
172, 79–87.
Goudjal, Y., Toumatia, O., Yekkour, A., Sabaou, N., Mathieu, F., Zitouni, A., 2014. Biocontrol
of Rhizoctonia solani damping-off and promotion of tomato plant growth by endophytic
actinomycetes isolated from native plants of Algerian Sahara. Microbiol. Res. 169, 59–65.
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
83

Gupta, G.N., Srivastava, S., Khare, S.K., Prakash, V., 2014. Role of phosphate solubilizing bac-
teria in crop growth and disease management. J. Pure Appl. Microbiol. 8 (1), 461–474.
Haggag, W.M., Abdallh, E.G., 2012. Purification and characterization of chitinase produced by
endophytic Streptomyces hygroscopicus against some phytopathogens. J. Microbiol. Res.
2 (5), 145–151.
Hamdan, H., Weller, D., Thomashow, L., 1991. Relative importance of fluorescens side-
rophores and other factors in biological control of Gaeumannomyces graminis var. Tritici
by Pseudomonas fluorescens 2-79 and M4-80R. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57 (11),
3270–3277.
Hassan, S.E., Salem, S.S., Fouda, A., Awad, M.A., El-Gamal, M.S., Abdo, A.M., 2018. New
approach for antimicrobial activity and bio-control of various pathogens by biosynthesized
copper nanoparticles using endophytic Actinomycetes. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci.
11, 262–270.
Hastuti, R.D., Lestari, Y., Suwanto, A., Saraswati, R., 2012. Endophytic Streptomyces spp. as
biocontrol agents of rice bacterial leaf blight pathogen (Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae).
Hayati J. Biosci. 19 (4), 155–162.
Hayat, R., 2010. Soil beneficial bacteria and their role in plant growth promotion: a review. Ann.
Microbiol. 60 (4), 579–598.
Holiday, P., 1989. A Dictionary of Plant Pathology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
p. 369.
Huang, J., Wei, Z., Tan, S., Mei, X., Yin, S., Shen, Q., Xu, Y., 2013. The rhizosphere soil of
diseased tomato plants as a source for novel microorganisms to control bacterial wilt. Appl.
Soil Ecol. 72, 79–84.
Husen, E., 2003. Screening of soil bacteria for plant growth promotion activities in vitro. Indo-
nes. J. Agric. Sci. 4 (1), 27–31.
Imada, K., Sakai, S., Kajihara, H., Tanaka, S., Ito, S., 2016. Magnesium oxide nanoparticles
induce systemic resistance in tomato against bacterial wilt disease. Plant Pathol.
65, 551–560.
Irabor, A., Mmbaga, M.T., 2017. Evaluation of selected bacterial endophytes for biocontrol
potential against Phytophthora Blight of bell pepper (Capsicum annuum L.). J. Plant Pat-
hol. Microbiol. 8 (10), 1–7.
Istifadah, N., Ningtyas, D.N.Y., Suryatmana, P., Fitriatin, B.N., 2017. The abilities of endo-
phytic and biofertilizing bacteria and their combinations to suppress bacterial wilt disease
(Ralstonia solanacearum) of Chili. In: 2nd International Conference on Sustainable Agri-
culture and Food Security: A Comprehensive Approach, KnE Life Sciences, pp. 296–304.
Jalil, S.U., Mishra, M., Ansari, M.I., 2015. Current view on chitinase for plant defence. Trends
Biosci. 8 (24), 6733–6743.
James, E.K., Gyaneshwar, P., Mathan, N., Barraquio, W.L., Reddy, P.M., Iannetta, P.P.,
Olivares, F.L., Ladha, J.K., 2002. Infection and colonization of rice seedlings by the plant
growth promoting bacterium Herbaspirillum seropedicae Z67. Mol. Plant Microbe Inter-
act. 15, 894–906.
Kanhed, P., Birla, S., Gaikwad, S., Gade, A., Seabra, A.B., Rubilar, O., Duran, N., Rai, M.,
2014. In vitro antifungal efficacy of copper nanoparticles against selected crop pathogenic
fungi. Mater. Lett. 115, 13–17.
Karthikeyan,
M.,
Bhaskaran,
R.,
Radhika,
K.,
Mathiyazhagan,
S.,
Jayakumar,
V.,
Sandosskumar, R., Velazhahan, R., 2006a. Endophytic Pseudomonas fluorescens Endo2
and Endo35 induce resistance in black gram (Vigna mungo L. Hepper) to the pathogen
Macrophomina phaseolina. J. Plant Interact. 1 (3), 135–143.
Karthikeyan, M., Radhika, K., Mathiyazhagan, S., Bhaskaran, R., Samiyappan, R.,
Velazhahan, R., 2006b. Induction of phenolics and defnse related enzymes in coconut
84
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

(Cocos nucifera L.,) roots treated with biocontrol agents. Braz. J. Plant Physiol. 18 (3),
367–377.
Keel, C., Voisard, C., Berling, C.H., Kahir, G., Defago, G., 1989. Iron sufficiency is a prereq-
uisite for suppression of tobacco black root rot by Pseudomonas fluorescens strain CHA0
under gnotobiotic conditions. Phytopathology 79, 584–589.
Kefi, A., Slimene, I.B., Karkouch, I., Rihouey, C., Azaeiz, S., Bejaoui, M., et al., 2015. Char-
acterization of endophytic Bacillus strains from tomato plants (Lycopersicon esculentum)
displaying antifungal activity against Botrytis cinerea Pers. World J. Microbiol. Bio-
technol. 31 (12), 1967–1976.
Kesaulya, H., Hasinu, J.V., Tuhumury, G.N.C., 2017. Potential of Bacillus spp produces side-
rophores in suppressing the wilt disease of banana plants. In: International Symposium on
Food and Agro-biodiversity (ISFA) 2017 IOP Publishing IOP Conf. Series: Earth and
Environmental Science. vol. 102. 012016.
Khan, Z., Rho, H., Firrincieli, A., Hung, S.H., Luna, V., Masciarelli, O., Kim, S.H., Doty, S.L.,
2016. Growth enhancement and drought tolerance of hybrid poplar upon inoculation with
endophyte consortia. Curr. Plant Biol. 6, 38–47.
Kloepper, J.W., Ryu, C.M., 2006. Bacterial endophytes as elicitors of induced systemic resis-
tance. In: Schulz, B.J.E., Boyle, C.J.C., Sieber, T.N. (Eds.), Microbial Root Endophytes.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 33–52.
Kloepper, J.W., Leong, J., Teinize, M., Schroth, M.N., 1980. Enhanced plant growth by side-
rophores produced by plantgrowth promoting rhizobacteria. Nature 286, 885–886.
Ladner, D.C., Tchounwou, P.B., Lawrence, G.W., 2008. Evaluation of the effect of ecologic on
root knot nematode, Meloidogyne incognita, and tomato plant, Lycopersicon esculenum.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 5, 104–110.
Lee, S.O., Choi, G.J., Choi, Y.H., et al., 2008. Isolation and characterization of endophytic acti-
nomycetes from Chinese cabbage roots as antagonists to Plasmodiophora brassicae.
J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 18 (11), 1741–1746.
Li, W., Zhao, Y., Liu, C., Yao, G., Wu, S., Hou, C., et al., 2012. Callose deposition at plasmo-
desmata is a critical factor in restricting the cell-to-cell movement of soybean mosaic virus.
Plant Cell Rep. 31, 905–916.
Li, H., Guan, Y., Dong, Y., Zhao, L., Rong, S., Chen, W., 2018. Isolation and evaluation of
endophytic Bacillus tequilensis GYLH001 with potential application for biological control
of Magnaporthe oryzae. PLoS ONE. 13(10) e0203505.
Loper, J.E., Buyer, J.S., 1991. Siderophores in microbial interactions of plant surfaces. Mol.
Plant-Microbe Interact. 4, 5–13.
Madore, M., Webb, J.A., 1981. Leaf free space analysis and vein loading in Cucurbita pepo.
Can. J. Bot. 59 (12), 2550–2557.
Martı´nez-Rodrı´guez,
J.C.,
la
Mora-Amutio,
M.D.,
Plascencia-Correa,
L.A.,
Audelo-
Regalado, E., Guardado, F.R., Herna´ndez-Sa´nchez, E., Pen˜a-Ramı´rez, Y.J., et al., 2014.
Cultivable endophytic bacteria from leaf bases of Agave tequilana and their role as plant
growth promoters. Braz. J. Microbiol. 45 (4), 1333–1339.
Mathiyazhagan, S., Kavitha, K., Nakkeeran, S., Chandrasekar, G., Manian, K., Renukadevi, P.,
Krishnamoorthy, A.S., Fernando, W.G.D., 2009. PGPR mediated management of stem
blight of Phyllanthus Amarus (Schum and Thonn) caused by Corynespora Cassiicola
(Berk and Curt) Wei. Arch. Phytopathol. Plant Protect. 37, 183–199.
Mc Loughlin, T., Quinn, J., Bettermann, A., Bookland, R., 1992. Pseudomonas cepacia
suppression of sunflower. Pseudomonas cepacia. Wilt fungus and role of antifungal
compounds in controlling the disease. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 58 (3), 1760–1763.
Meena, K.R., Kanwar, S.S., 2015. Lipopeptides as the antifungal and antibacterial agents:
Applications in food safety and therapeutics. BioMed Res. Int. 473050, 9 pages.
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
85

Mercado-Blanco, J., Lugtenberg, B., 2014. Biotechnological applications of bacterial endo-
phytes. Curr. Biotechnol. 3, 60–75.
Miliute, I., Buzaite, O., Baniulis, D., Stanys, V., 2015. Bacterial endophytes in agricultural
crops and their role in stress tolerance: a review. Zemdirbyste-Agriculture 102 (4),
465–478.
Mousa, W.K., Shearer, C.R., Limay-Rios, V., Zhou, T., Raizada, M.N., 2015. Bacterial endo-
phytes from wild maize suppress Fusarium graminearum in modern maize and inhibit
mycotoxin accumulation. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 805.
Muthukumar, A., Udhayakumar, R., Naveenkumar, R., 2017. Role of bacterial endophytes in
plant disease control. In: Maheshwari, D., Annapurna, K. (Eds.), Endophytes: Crop Pro-
ductivity and Protection. Sustainable Development and Biodiversity. In: vol. 16. Springer,
Cham.
Nagendran, K., Karthikeyan, G., Peeran, M., Raveendran, M., Prabakar, K., Raguchander, T.,
2013. Management of bacterial leaf blight disease in rice with endophytic bacteria. World
Appl. Sci. J. 28 (12), 2229–2241.
Nagendran, K., Karthikeyan, G., Faisal, P.M., Kalaiselvi, P., Raveendran, M., Prabakar, K.,
Raguchander, T., 2014. Exploiting endophytic bacteria for the management of sheath
blight disease in rice. Biol. Agric. Hortic. 30 (1), 8–23.
Naiki, T., Kageyama, K., Ikegami, H., 1978. The relation of spore density of Plasmodiophora
brassicae Wor. to the root hair infection and club formation in Chinese cabbage. Ann.
Phytopathol. Soc. Jpn. 44, 432–439.
Nandhini, S., Sendhilvel, V., Babu, S., 2012. Endophytic bacteria from tomato and their efficacy
against Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici, the wilt pathogen. J. Biopest. 5, 178–185.
Nascimento, S.B., Lima, A.M., Borges, B.N., de Souza, C.R.B., 2015. Endophytic bacteria from
Piper tuberculatum Jacq.: Isolation, molecular characterization, and in vitro screening for
the control of Fusarium solani f. sp piperis, the causal agent of root rot disease in black
pepper (Piper nigrum L.). Genet. Mol. Res. 14 (3), 7567–7577.
Nawangsih, A.A., Damayanti, I., Wiyono, S., Kartika, J.G., 2011. Selection and characteriza-
tion of endophytic bacteria as biocontrol agents of tomato bacterial wilt disease. Hayati J.
Biosci. 18 (2), 66–70.
Nejad, P., Johnson, P.A., 2000. Endophytic bacteria induce growth promotion and wilt disease
suppression in oilseed rape and tomato. Biol. Control 18, 208–215.
Ordentlich, A., Elad, Y., Chet, I., 1988. The role of chitinase of Serratia marcescens in biocon-
trol of Sclerotium rolfsii. Phytopathology 78, 84–92.
Pan, D., Mionetto, A., Tiscornia, S., Bettucci, L., 2015. Endophytic bacteria from wheat grain as
biocontrol agents of Fusarium graminearum and deoxynivalenol production in wheat.
Mycotoxin Res. 31 (3), 137–143.
Pathak, A., Sharma, A., Johri, B.N., 2004. Pseudomonas strain GRP3 induces systemic resis-
tance to sheath blight in rice. Int. Rice Res. Notes 29, 35–36.
Petti, C., Reiber, K., Ali, S.S., Berney, M., Doohan, F.M., 2012. Auxin as a player in the bio-
control of Fusarium head blight disease of barley and its potential as a disease control
agent. BMC Plant Biol. 12, 224.
Pleban, S., Ingel, F., Chet, I., 1995. Control of Rhizoctonia solani and Sclerotium rolfsii in the
greenhouse using endophytic Bacillus spp. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 101, 665–672.
Pleban, S., Chernin, L., Chet, I., 1997. Chitinolytic activity of an endophytic strain of Bacillus
cereus. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 25, 284–288.
Prasannath, K., De Costa, D.M., 2015. Induction of peroxidase activity in tomato leaf tissues
treated
with
two
crop
management
systems
across
a
temperature
gradient.
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Dry Zone Agriculture 2015. Faculty
of Agriculture, University of Jaffna, Sri Lanka, pp. 34–35.
86
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

Preston, G.M., Bertrand, N., Rainey, P.B., 2001. Type III secretion in plant growth-promoting
Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25. Mol. Microbiol. 41, 999–1014.
Quecine, M.C., Araujo, W.L., Marcon, J., Gai, C.S., Azevedo, J.L., Pizzirani-Kleiner, A.A.,
2008. Chitinolytic activity of endophytic Streptomyces and potential for biocontrol. Lett.
Appl. Microbiol. 47, 486–491.
Rajendran, L., Saravanakumar, D., Raguchander, T., Samiyappan, R., 2006. Endophytic bacte-
rial induction of defence enzymes against bacterial blight of cotton. Phytopathol. Mediterr.
45, 203–214.
Rajendran, L., Samiyappan, R., Raguchander, T., Saravanakumar, D., 2007. Endophytic bacte-
ria mediate plant resistance against cotton bollworm. J. Plant Interact. 2 (1), 1–10.
Rajendran, L., Akila, R., Karthikeyan, G., Raguchander, T., Samiyappan, R., 2015. Defense
related enzyme induction in coconut by endophytic bacteria (EPC 5). Acta Phytopathol.
Entomol. Hung. 50 (1), 29–43.
Ramesh, R., Joshi, A.A., Ghanekar, M.P., 2009. Pseudomonads: major antagonistic endophytic
bacteria to suppress bacterial wilt pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum in the eggplant
(Solanum melongena L.). World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 25, 47–55.
Rania, A.B.A., Jabnoun-Khiareddine, H., Nefzi, A., Mokni-Tlili, S., Remadi, M.D., 2016.
Endophytic bacteria from Datura metel for plant growth promotion and bioprotection
against Fusarium wilt in tomato. Biocontrol Sci. Technol. 26 (8), 1139–1165.
Reinhold-Hurek, B., Hurek, T., 2011. Living inside plants: bacterial endophytes. Curr. Opin.
Plant Biol. 14, 435–443.
Ricarova, V., Kazda, J., Singh, K., Rysˇa´nek, P., 2016. Clubroot caused by Plasmodiophora
brassicae Wor.: a review of emerging serious disease of oilseed rape in the Czech Republic.
Plant Prot. Sci. 52, 71–86.
Rosenblueth, M., Martinez-Romero, E., 2006. Bacterial endophytes and their interactions with
hosts. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 19, 827–837.
Safdarpour, F., Khodakaramian, G., 2018. Endophytic bacteria suppress bacterial wilt of tomato
caused by Ralstonia solanacearum and activate defense-related metabolites. Biol. J.
Microorganism 6 (24), 39–52.
Saha, M., Sarkar, S., Sarkar, B., et al., 2016. Microbial siderophores and their potential appli-
cations: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 3984–3999.
Sandhya, V., Shrivastava, M., Ali, S.Z., Prasad, V.S.S.K., 2017. Endophytes from maize with
plant growth promotion and bio-control activity under drought stress. Russ. Agric. Sci.
43 (1), 22–34.
Santoyo, G., Moreno-Hagelsieb, G., del Carmen Orozco-Mosqueda, M., Glick, B.R., 2016.
Plant growth-promoting bacterial endophytes. Microbiol. Res. 183, 92–99.
Scherwinski, K., Grosch, R., Berg, G., 2008. Effect of bacterial antagonists on lettuce: Active
biocontrol of Rhizoctonia solani and negligible, short-term effects on nontarget microor-
ganisms. FEMS Microiol. Ecol. 64, 106–116.
Schulz, B., Boyle, C., 2006. What are endophytes? In: Schulz, B.J.E., Boyle, C.J.C.,
Sieber, T.N. (Eds.), Microbial Root Endophytes. Soil Biology, vol. 9. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Selim, H.M.M., Gomaa, N.M., Essa, A.M.M., 2016. Application of endophytic bacteria for the
biocontrol of Rhizoctonia solani (Cantharellales: Ceratobasidiaceae) damping-off disease
in cotton seedlings. Biocontrol Sci. Technol. 27 (1), 81–95.
Seo, D.J., Nguyen, D.M., Song, Y.S., Jung, W.J., 2012. Induction of defense response against
Rhizoctonia solani in cucumber plants by endophytic bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis
GS1. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 22 (3), 407–415.
Seuk, C., Paulita, T., Baker, R., 1988. Attributes associate with increased bio-control activity of
fluorescent Pseudomonads. J. Plant Pathol. 4 (3), 218–225.
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
87

Shanmugaiah, V., Nithya, K., Harikrishnan, H., Jayaprakashvel, M., Balasubramanian, N.,
2016. Biocontrol mechanisms of siderophores against bacterial plant pathogens.
In: Kannan, V.R., Bastas, K.K. (Eds.), Sustainable Approaches to Controlling Plant
Pathogenic Bacteria. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, New York, pp. 167–190.
Sharma, P., Bora, L.C., Puzari, K.C., Baruah, A.M., Baruah, B., Talukdar, K., Kataky, L.,
Phukan, A., 2017. Review on of rice caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae: different
management approaches and role of Pseudomonas fluorescens as a potential biocontrol
agent. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 6 (3), 982–1005.
Shiomi, H.F., Silva, H.S.A., Melo, I.S., Nunes, F.V., Bettiol, W., 2006. Bioprospecting endo-
phytic bacteria for biological control of coffee leaf rust. Sci. Agric. (Piracicaba, Braz.)
63 (1), 32–39.
Shylla, A., Shivaprakash, M.K., Shashidha, H.E., Vishwakarma, P., Sudradhar, M., 2016. Pro-
duction of phytohormones by endophytic bacteria isolated from aerobic rice. J. Pure Appl.
Microbiol. 10 (3), 21–27.
Siddiqui, I.A., Ehetshamul-Haque, S., Shaukat, S.S., 2001. Use of rhizobacteria in the control of
root rot-root knot disease complex of mungbean. J. Phytopathol. 149, 337–346.
Singh, D., Dhar, S., Yadav, D.K., 2010. Effect of endophytic bacterial antagonists against black
rot disease of cauliflower caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. Campestris. Indian
Phytopathol. 63 (2), 122–126.
Singh, V.K., Singh, A.K., Kumar, A., 2017. Disease management of tomato through PGPB:
current trends and future perspective. 3 Biotech 7, 255.
Sneh, B., Dupler, M., Elad, Y., Baker, R., 1984. Chlamydospore germination of Fusarium
oxysporum f. sp. cucumerinum as affected by fluorescent and lytic bacteria from Fusarium
suppressive soils. Phytopathology 74, 1115–1124.
Soria, S., Alonso, R., Lina Bettucci, L., 2012. Endophytic bacteria from Pinus taeda L. as bio-
control agents of Fusarium circinatum NIRENBERG & O’DONNELL. Chilean J. Agric.
Res. 72 (2), 281–284.
Sreeja, S.J., 2012. Isolation, identification and in vitro evaluation of endophytic actinomycetes
against bacterial wilt pathogen in tomato. Pest Manag. Hortic. Ecosyst. 18 (1), 66–69.
Strobel, G., Daisy, B., Castillo, U., Harper, J., 2004. Natural products from endophytic micro-
organisms. J. Nat. Prod. 67, 257–268.
Sturz, A.V., Christie, B.R., Matheson, B.G., Arsenault, W.J., Buchanan, N.A., 1999. Endo-
phytic bacterial communities in the periderm of potato tubers and their potential to improve
resistance to soilborne plant pathogens. Plant Pathol. 48, 360–369.
Sturz, A.V., Christie, B.R., Nowak, J., 2000. Bacterial endophytes: potential role in developing
sustainable systems of crop production. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 19, 1–30.
Sudisha, J., Sharathchandra, R., Amruthesh, K., Kumar, A., Shetty, H.S., 2012. Pathogenesis
related proteins in plant defense response. In: Plant Defence: Biological Control. Springer,
New York, pp. 379–403.
Sun, S.K., Huang, J.W., 1985. Formulated soil amendment for controlling Fusarium wilt and
other soil-borne disease. Plant Dis. 69, 917.
Sun, Z.B., Yuan, X.F., Zhang, H., Wu, L.F., Liang, C., Feng, Y.J., 2013. Isolation, screening and
identification of antagonistic downy mildew endophytic bacteria from cucumber. Eur. J.
Plant Pathol. 137, 847–857.
Taechowisan, T., Peberdy, J.F., Lumyong, S., 2003. Chitinase production by endophytic Strep-
tomyces aureofaciens CMUAc130 and its antagonism against phytopathogenic fungi. Ann.
Microbiol. 53, 447–461.
Tan, D., Fu, L., Han, B., Sun, X., Zheng, P., Zhang, J., 2015. Identification of an endophytic
antifungal bacterial strain isolated from the rubber tree and its application in the biological
control of banana Fusarium Wilt. PLoS ONE. 10(7) e0131974.
88
Microbial Endophytes: Prospects for Sustainable Agriculture

Thakur, R.K., Shirkot, P., 2017. Potential of biogold nanoparticles to control plant pathogenic
nematodes. J. Bioanal. Biomed. 9, 220–222.
Ting, A.S.Y., Meon, S., Kadir, J., Radu, S., Singh, G., 2010. Induction of host defense enzymes
by the endophytic bacterium Serratia marcescens, in banana plantlets. Int. J. Pest Manag.
56 (2), 183–188.
Tjamos, E.C., Tsitsigiannis, D.I., Tjamos, S.E., Antoniou, P., Katinakis, P., 2004. Selection and
screening of endorhizosphere bacteria from solarised soils as biocontrol agents against
Verticillium dahliae of solanaceous hosts. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 110, 35–44.
Tolba, I.H., Soliman, M.A., 2013. Efficacy of native antagonistic bacterial isolates in biological
control of crowngall disease in Egypt. Ann. Agric. Sci. 58, 43–49.
Tombolini, R., Jansson, J.K., 1998. Monitoring of GFP-tagged bacterial cells. In: LaRossa, R.A.
(Ed.), Methods in Molecular Biology. Bioluminescence Methods and Protocols. Humana
Press Inc., Totowa, NJ, pp. 285–298.
Tombolini, R., Unge, A., Davey, M.E., de Bruijn, F.J., Jansson, J.K., 1997. Flow cytometric and
microscopic analysis of GFP tagged Pseudomonas fluorescens bacteria. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 22, 17–28.
Tsuda, K., Kosaka, Y., Tsuge, S., Kub, Y., Horin, A.O., 2001. Evaluation of the endophyte
Enterobacter cloacae SM10 isolated from spinach roots for biological control against
Fusarium Wilt of spinach. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 67, 78–84.
Validov, S., Kamilova, F., Qi, S., Stephan, D., Wang, J.J., Makarova, N., Lugtenberg, B., 2007.
Selection of bacteria able to control Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici in
stonewool substrate. J. Appl. Microbiol. 102, 461–471.
Vanitha, S.C., Umesha, S., 2011. Pseudomonas fluorescens mediated systemic resistance in
tomato is driven through an elevated synthesis of defense enzymes. Biol. Plant. 55, 17–322.
Werra, P., Pechy-Tarr, M., Keel, C., Maurhofer, M., 2009. Role of gluconic acid production in
the regulation of biocontrol traits of Pseudomonas fluorescens CHA0. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 75 (12), 4162–4174.
Yan, X., Huang, L.L., Tu, X., Gao, X.N., Kang, Z.S., 2012. Saccharothrix yanglingensis sp.
nov., an antagonistic endophytic actinomycete isolated from cucumber plant. Antonie
van Leeuwenhoek, 141–146.
Yanti, Y., Warnita, R., Busniah, M., 2018. Indigenous endophyte bacteria ability to control
Ralstonia and Fusarium wilt disease on chili pepper. Biodiversitas 19 (4), 1532–1538.
Zachow, C., Jahanshah, G., de Bruijn, I., Song, C., Ianni, F., Pataj, Z., Gerhardt, H., Pianet, I.,
Lammerhofer, M., Berg, G., Gross, H., Raaijmakers, J.M., 2015. The novel lipopeptide
poaeamide of the endophyte Pseudomonas poae RE* 1-1-14 is involved in pathogen sup-
pression and root colonization. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 28, 800–810.
Zhang, X.X., George, A., Bailey, M.J., Rainey, P.B., 2006. The histidine utilization (hut) genes
of Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 are active on plant surfaces, but are not required for
competitive colonization of sugar beet seedlings. Microbiology 152, 1867–1875.
Endophytic bacteria in plant disease management
89
