Susan Gonya, MA, RD, LDN, RN, CCRN
Advisor: Dr. Pamela DiNapoli, PhD, RN, CNL
University of New Hampshire
Background
Eﬀects of DON exposure on the enterocytes
Aim
•  Identify foods regularly contaminated with DON.
• Review all diets currently used to treat pediatric Crohn’s disease (CD) that decrease inﬂammatory 
laboratory markers and induce remission.
•  Describe the link between mycotoxin exposure and intestinal health.
Results
Gonya’s Conceptual Model for the Low Mycotoxin Diet
Discussion and Conclusions
• Children are at risk for more frequent exposures to DON through foods like cereals, 
breads, pasta, cakes, snack foods, etc. which can have an additive eﬀect.
• Smaller body size places children at higher risk than adults for intake over the 
tolerable daily intake. Pediatric CD patients may be at an even higher risk than 
healthy children.
• Direct measurement of mycotoxin content in foods in a typical child’s diet such as 
cereals, bread, pasta, and pizza is recommended for further investigation. 
• The evidence supports that reducing dietary mycotoxin exposure in young patients 
with already compromised GI function is warranted.
• Further nursing research aimed at clarifying the role of mycotoxins like DON in 
exacerbating the disease process is also needed. 
• The low-mycotoxin diet looks promising as a nutritious and more diverse alternative 
to previous dietary approaches used in the treatment of pediatric Crohn’s disease.
Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Millet, 
Triticale, Corn, Soy, Rice, Coffee, 
Cocoa and Seed Oils:
Sources of Deoxynivalenol (DON), 
Nivalenol (NIV), T-2 and HT-2 toxin, 
among others
Animals eat grains 
with DON, NIV and 
other mycotoxins, 
which may persist in 
dairy products
Mycotoxins may 
persist in dairy 
products and human 
milk for human 
consumption
Mycotoxins may 
persist in public 
water sources from 
animal and human 
waste
Symptoms of Crohn’s 
Disease: abdominal 
pain, nausea, 
vomiting, intestinal 
hemorrhage, etc.
Grains are used to 
produce cereal, 
breads, crackers, 
alcohol, xanthan gum 
and other products for 
human consumption
2019 ©Susan L. Gonya
Thinning Mucus Layer
Transcellular
Route
Paracellular
Route
Dendritic Cell
Epithelial Cell
Microbes
DON
Particles
Penetrate Mucus
Tight Junction
Micro-Villi
Basolateral Surface
Apical Surface
Lymphocytes
Glut2
Glucose
Goblet
Cell
Goblet
Cell
Glucose
Na+/k+ Pump
Claudin
ZO-1
E-cadherin
Occludin
K+
K+
Na+
Na+
SGLT1
Na+
}
}
}
Decreased Microbial Diversity and 
Decreased Ability to Detoxify 
Secondary Metabolites like DON
TH-1, TNF-α, 1L-γ, IL-1β, IL-1α, STAT 3
TH-17 (IL-17, IL-6, IL-23A, IL-22, IL-21)
Mucus Layer: 
Deoxynivalenol (DON) exposure may decrease the number of goblet cells potentially decreasing the protective mucus barrier.
Paracellular Route: Tight Junction disruption and increased permeability leading to:
 
- Increased translocation of mycotoxins, pathogenic bacteria, viruses, food antigens, etc.
 
- Stimulation of immune defenses and lymphocytes
Trancellular Route:  Impairment of glucose and other nutrient uptake.
Lymphocytes:  
Lymphocytes respond to DON and other foreign antigens by producing inﬂammatory cytokines.
2019 Susan L. Gonya
Do We Really Know What's in Our Food?
Dietary Mycotoxin Exposure and Pediatric Crohn’s Disease
Abstract
BACKGROUND: There have been numerous diets and nutritional strategies evaluated over 
the past several years for their ability to induce remission in Crohn’s disease (CD), yet little 
attention has been given to mycotoxins within the human food supply. Of all the mycotoxins 
found in food, deoxynivalenol (DON) appears to be the most prevalent and resilient and can 
be highly damaging to the human gastrointestinal tract. 
PURPOSE: The objective of this mixed methods pilot study was to investigate if there is 
suﬃcient evidence to support the development and testing of a low mycotoxin diet as a 
potential treatment modality for CD.
METHOD: A literature review of potential dietary sources of DON contamination was 
conducted using CINAHL, Medline, PubMed, and the Biological Science Collection databases. 
Grain-based and non-grain-based cooking ﬂours were also directly tested for DON using 
lateral ﬂow and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) 
methods. Descriptive statistics were used to quantify chemical testing results.
RESULTS: Wheat and corn ﬂours were found to be routinely contaminated, but not in 
amounts above regulatory guidelines. Other grain-based crops, soy, coﬀee, certain seed oils, 
animal milk, human milk and various water reservoirs have been found to be contaminated 
intermittently. 
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: The cumulative eﬀects of multiple exposures to DON in 
routinely and intermittently contaminated foods may be having deleterious eﬀects on 
pediatric CD patients. Direct measurement of foods in a typical child’s diet such as cereals, 
pasta, and pizza, that may contain this mycotoxin is recommended for further investigation. 
Further nursing research aimed at clarifying the role of mycotoxins like DON in the disease 
process is needed. The evidence supports the need for development of a low-mycotoxin diet 
as an alternative to previous dietary interventions in the treatment of pediatric CD.
