 
Ethical objections to 
Fairtrade 
 
Peter Griffiths 
 
Published by the Journal of Business Ethics July 2011 
The final publication is available at www.springerlink.com  
(DOI) 10.1007/s10551-011-0972-0 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The Fairtrade movement is a group of businesses claiming to trade ethically. The 
claims are evaluated, under a range of criteria derived from the Utilitarian ethic. 
Firstly, if aid or charity money is diverted from the very poorest people to the quite 
poor, or the rich, there is an increase in death and destitution. It is shown that little 
of the extra paid by consumers for Fairtrade reaches farmers, sometimes none. It 
cannot be shown that it has a positive impact on Fairtrade farmers in general, but 
evidence suggesting it harms others is presented. Many of the weaknesses are due 
to an attempt to impose political views on farmers and others.  
Secondly, the unfair trading criteria require that sellers do not lie about 
their product, nor withhold information that might alter the decisions of a 
substantial proportion of buyers. It is argued that the system only can exist because 
of the failure of the Fairtrade industry to give the facts on what happens to the 
money and what it can be proved it achieves. This unfair trading compromises the 
reputation of charities in general. 
Much of the trading may constitute the criminal offence of Unfair Trading in 
the EU. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
This study analyses the claim that Fairtrade is ethical trading. It starts with a brief 
outline of Fairtrade. It sets out the basic ethical criteria to be used. These are expanded 
and extended as fuller details of the operation of Fairtrade are presented. This analysis 
covers only Fairtrade and not the other systems whose participants think of themselves 
as Fair Trade (two words). 
Fairtrade is a commercial brand. Its owners, the Fairtrade Foundation, have been 
very successful in persuading customers that it does ‘ethical trading’, and that by 

 
2 
 
buying Fairtrade goods they are giving producers a fair price, dealing fairly with them, 
and giving money to poor producers in the Third World. It has had considerable 
support from grassroots to ministerial level, and has received gifts of time, money, 
marketing and preferential trading opportunities from private individuals, firms and 
public bodies. The retail turnover in the UK alone was £799m in 2009. 
For a fee, the Fairtrade Foundation gives companies in the developed world – 
coffee processors and packers or supermarket chains for instance – a licence to use the 
brand (with the Fairtrade brand being displayed on their own branded goods). 85% of 
the income of the UK Fairtrade Foundation income comes from this, with the 
remaining 14% coming from donations and government grants (Fairtrade UK, 2009). At 
least 70% of this licence income is spent in the UK, mainly on promoting the brand. The 
accounts are not clear on how or where the rest is spent, but it appears to be spent by 
the Fairtrade organization, some of it for administration and control of standards by 
the international umbrella organization, The Fairtrade Labelling Organizations 
International, rather than being given to farmers in the Third World. Licensees use the 
Fairtrade brand in addition to the normal commercial brand, not as a substitute. 
Licensees and retailers do marketing and advertising both for their own brand 
Fairtrade and for Fairtrade in general. They benefit in three ways: they can charge a 
higher margin; they expect higher turnover; and they can launder their image, 
becoming perceived as a fair organization helping the Third World. 
The money intended for the Third World is an entirely separate income stream, 
which does not pass through the Fairtrade organization. The product must be 
produced by Fairtrade-certified suppliers in the Third World, nearly always members of 
a marketing cooperative, but plantation companies for a few products. These suppliers 
must meet a range of political standards to be certified. For coffee, the flagship 
product, there are typically several levels involved: the farmers themselves, the 
primary cooperatives which do the assembly and processing, and the secondary or 
tertiary cooperatives which export on behalf of the primary cooperatives. The 
exporting cooperative is paid a price 10c a pound higher than the world price for any 
coffee that, first, meets the Fairtrade standards and, second, is sold with the Fairtrade 
brand. The higher price is termed the ‘social premium’ and may be spent by the 
exporting cooperative on business expenses including the costs of meeting Fairtrade 
standards, or on social projects like health, education or constructing baseball fields. 
Some cooperatives pass on cash to farmers, giving them a higher price. A significant 
aspect is the minimum price, which gives the exporting cooperatives a price above the 
world price when the world price collapses, as it does from time to time. These price 
commitments apply to the exporting cooperatives only, not to the primary 
cooperatives or to farmers, and they cover only goods sold under the Fairtrade brand, 

 
3 
 
which may be a small part of the product meeting the standards, and a small part of 
the cooperative’s turnover. 
This analysis covers the Fairtrade system as a whole, from farmer to consumer, 
including cooperatives, importers, packers, wholesalers, supermarkets and cafes. It 
covers the Fairtrade Foundation UK (the system may operate differently in other rich 
countries) and the umbrella organization, the Fairtrade Labelling Organizations 
International. It also covers those advocates of Fairtrade who do not have any financial 
interest in it, but give money, time, effort, and preferential trading opportunities to it 
and who publicize it. These include firms, politicians, public servants and teachers.  
ETHICAL CRITERIA 
 
The ethical approach used here is the Utilitarian one of the greatest good for the 
greatest number, as is normal in dealing with public money. This uses the hedonic 
calculus, applying resources where they produce the greatest marginal utility. Two sets 
of ethical criteria are derived from the Utilitarian principles which will be used 
throughout the analysis. They are set out in this section, but they will be expanded on, 
and new criteria will be identified, as more information is presented. 
The first set derives from the fact that there will be an increase in death and 
destitution if money or resources intended for the very poorest people are diverted to 
people who are less poor or relatively rich. A very poor person who is made £5 worse 
off may not be able to buy a mosquito net or buy enough food to keep the children 
alive in the hungry season before the harvest. A less poor person losing £5 may suffer 
only not being able to buy batteries for a radio or to visit relatives. And the 
shareholders of a supermarket in a rich country may not notice £5 more or less. This is 
standard economics. These criteria mean that it is not sufficient to prove that some 
farmers benefit from Fairtrade: any meaningful analysis must also cover other 
Fairtrade farmers, and non-Fairtrade farmers.  
These criteria are applied at two levels: it is asked whether the money should be 
given to Fairtrade at all, and it is asked whether, once the money has been given to 
Fairtrade, it is spent in such a way as to maximize its impact. The criteria may be 
applied by comparing the impact of Fairtrade with the impact of alternative ways of 
delivering aid or charity to the Third World, using as a standard either giving money 
directly to a Third World government or giving it to one of those charities which 
guarantees that all donations are spent in the Third World. One widely used approach 
is to state on the label exactly how much of the price reaches Third World 
communities. Formally, those low-cost:high-impact aid interventions with a payoff of 
thousands to one are also an alternative. 

 
4 
 
The second set of criteria, Unfair Trading, includes two relevant principles: that it 
is unethical to lie to a customer about a product and it is unethical to fail to give 
consumers important information about a product, information that is likely to cause 
the average consumer to make a different purchasing decision.  Under the Utilitarian 
approach it is wrong because it is a way of facilitating the allocation of money in a way 
that increases death and destitution, as in the first criterion – a derived wrong. 
Secondly, there is the cost when donors realize that their money has been used for 
purposes that they had not intended. Thirdly, the use of lies and suppression of 
evidence damages the efficiency of markets, and can collapse them entirely, causing 
widespread public harm. To the extent that this happens in the charitable sector, there 
is a risk that the public will stop giving money to any charity. And risk is an economic 
cost. This is recognized by legislators: both lying and failing to give relevant information 
to customers would constitute the criminal offence of Unfair Trading throughout the 
EU under Directive 2005/29/EC on Unfair Commercial Practices (European Commission, 
2005). While I refer to these regulations from time to time, I would emphasize that 
only the courts can interpret them, and decide what practices are unfair, and whether 
it is, for example, the retailer, the wholesaler, the manufacturer or the brand owner 
who commits the offence. However, the fact that a practice may not be a criminal 
offence does not mean it is ethical. 
 
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE MONEY? 
 
With Fairtrade, as with charity Christmas cards or free range eggs, customers pay 
a higher price in the belief that nearly all the extra will go to the intended beneficiaries. 
The Fairtrade Foundation’s basic guarantee is, ‘A fair and stable price to farmers for 
their products’ (Fairtrade Foundation, 2011). A reasonable consumer might assume 
from this that 80%, say, of the extra amount paid went in higher prices to the farmers, 
in such a way as to get the greatest good for the greatest number. This section 
examines what actually happens to the money. First it asks how much reaches the 
exporting cooperative, half way up the marketing chain. Then it asks what happens to 
this money: how much goes in added costs to the Fairtrade cooperatives; how much is 
spent on social projects; how much goes in extra money to Fairtrade farmers; and what 
harm is caused to non-Fairtrade farmers.  To the extent that the money does not reach 
the intended beneficiaries, there is an increase in Death and Destitution. To the extent 
that consumers are not given information that might change their decision to buy 
Fairtrade, there is Unfair Trading, which is unethical. 
 

 
5 
 
 
How much gets to the exporting Cooperative? 
In practice, retailers, wholesalers and manufacturers are free to charge whatever 
they wish for Fairtrade products. Fairtrade does not monitor or control how much 
extra they charge. It is almost never possible for a customer to determine how much 
extra is charged, because retailers almost never sell identical Fairtrade and non-
Fairtrade products side by side. There are differences in brand, quality, origin, etc. 
which make price comparisons impossible.1 There is no shortage of evidence that 
consumers are willing to pay more for Fairtrade coffee, and it would be surprising if 
retailers did not price accordingly. 
Very occasionally it is possible to calculate how much extra is paid. One of the 
largest British café chains let it be known that they were charging 10p a cup extra for 
Fairtrade coffee, which made it possible to calculate that less than 1% of the extra price 
reached the Third World exporter. That is to say customers would have achieved at 
least 100 times as much if they had given the 10p to a reputable charity instead of 
buying Fairtrade. Valkila, Haaparanta and Niemi (2010, p. 266) were able to get 
information not normally available on coffee sales, and found that consumers in 
Finland paid considerably more for Fairtrade certified coffee than for alternatives, but 
that only 11.5% of the extra paid went to the exporting country. The amount reaching 
the farmer is not calculated. Kilian, Jones, Pratt and Villalobos (2006) talk of US 
Fairtrade coffee getting $5 per lb extra at retail, of which the exporting cooperative 
would have received 10c, or 2%. Mendoza and Bastiaensen (2003, p. 38) calculated 
that in the UK only 1.6% to 18% of the extra charged for Fairtrade reached the 
producers for one product line. It would take a great deal of evidence to show that 
these figures are not typical or at least common. However, there is no prospect of the 
evidence becoming available, as it would require retailers, wholesalers, packers and 
importers to expose their business to independent examination by forensic 
accountants and economists.  
Fairtrade’s own figures do not suggest that these figures would be unusual. 
Calculations from figures produced by Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International 
(2010) show that on average 1.53 percent of the retail price reaches the Third World as 
extra payment from Fairtrade membership – 52m Euros from sales of 3.2 billion.  
However, they do not give sources for their figures, and figures for previous years are 
                                                     
1 One UK Sainsbury superstore, in November 2010, had 76 product lines for coffee and 53 product 
lines for Fairtrade coffee.  The most expensive coffee was nearly four times the price of the cheapest, 
£21.20 per kg, compared with £5.36. Many of the more expensive lines were Fairtrade. Some of the 
objective characteristics were stated, such as organic, Arabica, produced in Costa Rica, but there was no 
indication of most of them. Most of them would have been blends of at least half a dozen different 
qualities and different growths, produced by different suppliers. 

 
6 
 
not available. The figures for the total cost of Fairtrade organizations, world wide and 
nationally, and the amount reaching the Third World, nationally and in total, should be 
readily available, but are not. It is possible to make rough calculations from what 
information is available, assuming that Fairtrade UK is typical of the national 
organizations (as all national organizations are subject to the same system and collect 
the same fees). It appears that the cost of operating the Fairtrade organizations in the 
rich countries is of the order of 75% to 100% of the gross amount of extra money 
reaching the Third World. There are also some unavoidable costs to processors, 
wholesalers and retailers in handling Fairtrade. That is to say, the absolute maximum 
proportion of the donations reaching the Third World would be 50% to 60%, in an ideal 
world where nobody charged higher mark-ups. This is consistent with the fact that 
Fairtrade charges wholesalers a fee of 3%,  and 1.53% of the retail price reaches 
exporters as extra payment. These proportions would be considered unacceptably low 
by many donors. 
That is to say much of the extra price paid, the donation, goes as extra profit in 
rich countries, which is unethical under the Death and Destitution criteria, and there is 
a failure to disclose this, which is unethical under the Unfair Trading criteria. 
For a product like a garment made of Fairtrade cotton, the system is even more 
opaque. How much extra does one pay for a dress made with Fairtrade cotton? How 
much Fairtrade cotton is in the dress? How much of the extra goes to the exporter? 
Even if I had been able to find an explanation of Fairtrade cotton on the Fairtrade 
website, I could not have made the calculation. 
 
Failure to pay the Fairtrade price 
The calculations on how much of the extra price reaches the Third World 
exporters have been made on the assumption that the exporters receive the full export 
price. However, products may be fraudulently marketed as Fairtrade when they are 
not. Some traders say that control is inadequate: a pre-announced visit by a Fairtrade 
accountant every five or six years is not likely to pick this up. It would be prohibitively 
expensive to monitor all the cafes and restaurants claiming to sell Fairtrade. 
Some buyers pay the licence fee, but do not pay the exporters the money that 
they are obliged to if they are to call the product Fairtrade. The Fairtrade system 
requires importers to 
1. Pay the minimum price set by Fairtrade, 
2. Pay a premium price, 
3. Provide credit for prefinancing so that Fairtrade cooperatives can pay 
cash on delivery, 
4. Enter into long-term contracts. 

 
7 
 
Companies are in a position to say, ‘We will buy your Fairtrade coffee but we will pay 
you less than the proper price. If you refuse, we will buy from another Fairtrade 
cooperative, and you will have to sell at an even lower price, the world commodity 
price. As you know, there is three times as much Fairtrade certified coffee available as 
the market will take.’ It is difficult for the cooperative to refuse. There is evidence that 
companies do this, sometimes paying the full Fairtrade price, but demanding a higher 
quality (Raynolds, 2009, p. 1089; Valkila, Haaparanta, & Niemi, 2010, p. 264; Valkila, 
2009). There is also a failure to provide the credit. Importers may pay cash on delivery, 
or pay late, or just not honour their contracts if world prices move against them. 
(Utting, 2009, p. 139; Valkila, 2009, pp. 3022-3; Raynolds, 2009, p. 1089). The 
mainstream traders sometimes provide better credit to farmers at significantly lower 
interest rates (Valkila, 2009, pp. 3022-3). The Fairtrade requirements on long term 
contracts are not strictly enforced (Reed, 2009, pp. 12, 21). 
These evasions are mentioned by some of the most enthusiastic supporters of 
Fairtrade, but they do not give details or discuss them, and appear not to have 
investigated them to find out how common they are. This is surprising as the evasions 
could make the whole system unworkable. 
The ethical problems raised are, first, the failure to control these problems 
effectively, second, the failure to admit to the problems, and, third, adopting a system 
where these problems arise – they do not arise with normal charity to the Third World.  
 
Ethical implications 
It has been shown that a small amount of the extra amount that consumers pay 
for Fairtrade gets even as far as the exporter. In a few cases it may be as much as half; 
in many cases it is much less. Much of the extra price paid, the donation, goes either in 
higher profit in rich countries, or in the Fairtrade organizations’ administration costs 
and their cost of collecting donations. This is unethical under the Death and Destitution 
criteria, 
It is likely that Fairtrade sales would be much lower if this were known by 
consumers. However, the extra amount consumers pay for Fairtrade products is almost 
universally concealed by retailers and the costs of the Fairtrade organizations and the 
amount reaching the Third World has not been disclosed. This is Unfair Trading and is 
unethical. The criterion that relevant information should not be concealed requires 
that a pack of Fairtrade coffee, say, should have the label ‘This pack costs 50p [say] 
more than an equivalent pack of non-Fairtrade coffee. A maximum of 3.4p of this 
reaches the Third World.’ 
Even those retailers who feel that they, and their supply chain, are beyond 
reproach, and that it is acceptable that only half the extra money paid reaches the 

 
8 
 
Third World in their particular operation, are under an ethical obligation to give this 
information. If they were to disclose their figures, they would put pressure on others to 
do the same, so there would no longer be firms pocketing 90% to 99% of the extra 
price charged. 
Similarly all charities have to publish their accounts. Many reputable ones publish 
them in great detail: they hope to drive out those charities that spend nearly all their 
revenue on collecting more revenue, that spend almost nothing on the intended 
beneficiaries, that are incompetent, and that are dishonest. That is to say they are 
acting according to the Ethical Trading criteria. Fairtrade, on the other hand, has been 
set up in such a way that most of the money donated does not even enter their 
accounting system, and it is not possible to find out what it is spent on.  
 
 
How much reaches the farmer? 
Fairtrade monitors the price paid to exporters. It does not control what happens 
to the money, nor does it monitor how much reaches the farmer. There can be no 
evidence for the claim, ‘Fairtrade guarantees a fair price for the producer’.  
Some of the extra money is spent on meeting the Fairtrade criteria for 
certification, sometimes a large proportion (Utting, 2009, p. 139; Valkila and Nygren, 
2009; Valkila, 2009, pp. 3022-3; Berndt, 2007). The exporting cooperatives, the primary 
cooperatives and the farmers all have to reach these criteria. They have to meet the 
criteria for all they produce, whatever proportion they manage to sell as Fairtrade 
branded. Obviously they would prefer to sell all they produce at the higher Fairtrade 
price, but the world market for the brand is about a third of the quantity produced, so 
two thirds is sold, unbranded, at the commodity price (Kilian, Jones, Pratt, & Villalobos, 
2006). Some cooperatives struggle to sell 10% to 15% of their total production as 
Fairtrade, so their added costs are higher than their added income. Nothing is left for 
social projects or for the farmers. Presumably they hope to sell more in future and 
make a profit. Others manage to sell most of their output as Fairtrade so the social 
premium is higher than the extra costs, but even here the cooperative management 
may say, ‘It’s not worth the trouble, Fairtrade.’’ (Berndt, 2007, p. 27)  
This gets some support from Fairtrade’s own figures (Fairtrade Labelling 
Organizations International, 2010).  Calculations show that 40% of the premium 
reaching the Third World goes on business and production, rather than on social 
projects or extra price to the farmer.  
Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International figures do not show that any 
money goes to farmers. Workers on Fairtrade plantations may do no better: tea 
workers in Kenya and India may get a thermos flask every few years as their payoff 

 
9 
 
from Fairtrade (Bahra, 2009a) (Bahra, 2009b). However, researchers suggest that some 
farmers have demanded to receive cash, rather than have the money put into 
underperforming social projects.  
 Some Fairtrade employees claim that Fairtrade Labelling Organizations 
International is wrong. Martin Hill, Director of Commercial Relations, Fairtrade 
Foundation UK, spoke at the European Coffee Symposium (2009), and said that all the 
Fairtrade Premium was passed on to farmers at farm gate - not just to the cooperative 
exporter, nor spent on business and production expenses, or on social projects. 
 
 
Is cooperative marketing efficient? 
The possibility must be considered that the Fairtrade export cooperative gets a 
higher price than other exporters do, but cooperative marketing is so inefficient that 
the producers would get a lower price, even if nothing was spent on social projects. 
This is of fundamental importance as nearly all Fairtrade producers are compelled to 
sell through their cooperative and cannot switch to another buyer without losing their 
Fairtrade status. 
Much of the Fairtrade literature claims that alternative marketing systems are 
inefficient and pay farmers less than they should, and cheat them. It then claims or 
implies that these problems will vanish with Fairtrade and cooperatives, which is a non 
sequitur. The Fairtrade literature does not refer to the standard literature on 
agricultural marketing which confirms that all marketing systems are inefficient in 
some ways and have some cheating, and that some systems are terrible, but presents 
tried and tested ways of investigating and reforming them. These reforms are 
examples of low-cost:high-impact aid, where an input of two or three person-months 
may double or quadruple the net cash income of millions of farmers – producing 
payoffs higher than the whole of Fairtrade. Marketing economists have to keep 
pointing out the facts. Marketing is more expensive than growing the crop and takes 
more skill. Where there are many traders competing, it is unlikely that they are in a 
ring, conspiring to reduce producer prices. The fact that there are many layers of 
middlemen does not imply unnecessarily high marketing costs; on the contrary, the 
many, small, specialized, flexible traders produce a product that is cheap and reliable – 
if this were not so, the large monolithic traders which handle all levels from farmer to 
supermarket would have forced them out of business. Cooperatives are traders which 
carry out the same marketing functions as other traders and these functions cost 
money. They have the same problems with dishonest scale operators, graders and 
buyers. The fact that they have a different ownership does not imply that they are 
lower in cost. The market does not operate in a markedly different manner because 

 
10 
 
some of the traders are owned in this way. Nor do cooperative members necessarily 
have any more control than shareholders of other firms. 
There has been an enormous amount of research on agricultural cooperatives in 
the last hundred years, by the government departments supervising them, by aid 
agencies and by academics. The experience is that when rich capitalist farmers set up 
marketing cooperatives and employ professional managers, they can be very 
successful. When small farmers who are ill-educated and have no business experience 
set up cooperatives, serious problems are common, even when professional managers 
are employed – it is easy for an educated clique to take over, and they, or the 
managers, can easily cheat illiterate and innumerate farmers. These problems do arise 
with Fairtrade cooperatives: see for example Utting, (2009, p. 140), Jones & Bayley, 
(2000), Mendoza & J. Bastiaensen, (2003), and Berndt, (2007).  When, in addition, the 
cooperative has political objectives, problems are normal.  
One example of research showing the problems with Fairtrade cooperatives is 
Mendoza & J. Bastiaensen (2003, p. 42). 
 
‘A more detailed analysis [of a Nicaraguan Fairtrade Cooperative] 
reveals that the disadvantage is mainly the result of higher administrative costs; 
to a lesser degree disadvantageous access to local financial services also plays its 
role (Mendoza, 2002, p.34–9). The crucial weakness in terms of administration 
costs is directly related to the co-operative model, which compares unfavourably 
with the decentralized brokerage system of the commercial network of 
intermediaries and local traders. The co-operative structure involves an 
expensive, top-heavy entrepreneurial hierarchy, including a large administrative 
staff and substantial representation costs for its leaders (12 in the case of 
Prodecoop). The administrative inefficiencies of such co-ops can be very serious: 
the Empresa Cooperativa de Cafetaleros Organicos de Nicaragua (ECOCOONIC), a 
quite promising co-operative of organic coffee producers with a turnover of 88 
000 tonne/year, went bankrupt in the 1990s due to the administrative 
inefficiency of the co-operative model’  
 
Cooperatives have received enormous support from governments, donors, and 
NGOs over the years, in the form of cash, management support and market 
opportunities, but they have failed to maintain their market share, which suggests that 
they cannot always compete with normal traders.  
The fact that cooperatives’ accounts are audited does not mean they are honest: 
virtually all firms’ accounts are. Any accounting firm that blows the whistle on 
corruption is likely to lose its clients very quickly. It is possible to analyse the operations 
of cooperatives to identify corruption and inefficiency, but in my experience it is 

 
11 
 
physically dangerous, as exemplified my personal experience where the manager of an 
agricultural cooperative ‘just looked me in the eye and said, “Mr Griffiths. In this 
country, you can get a man killed for $150  -  Jamaican.”’ (Griffiths, 2003, p. 205). 
Researchers are seldom trained to do this sort of forensic accounting investigation. 
Ethical problems arise when they are reluctant to print their findings because of the 
law of libel, and because neither they nor their colleagues will get access to 
cooperatives or other firms for future research, if academics start exposing corruption. 
Inevitably some cooperatives are less efficient than some traders and pay lower 
prices, and some Fairtrade cooperatives are less efficient than other, non-Fairtrade, 
cooperatives. Fairtrade farmers have to stick with their cooperative, even if it is failing, 
while other farmers can switch to whoever pays the best price. This suggests that one 
should leave it to farmers to decide which buyer offers the best deal. The failure to do 
so is a design fault. 
 
Do Fairtrade farmers get higher prices? 
Do Fairtrade farmers get higher prices? The Fairtrade Foundation’s basic 
guarantee ‘A fair and stable price to farmers for their products’ (Fairtrade Foundation, 
2011) implies that they do. If this were so, cooperatives would manage to pay higher 
prices in spite of spending most of the extra money on certification costs, business 
expenses, social projects and inefficient marketing. Even this would not necessarily 
mean that Fairtrade farmers benefited, with a higher net cash income, as they have to 
spend some of their revenue on paying the costs of conformity – higher expenditure on 
employed labour for instance. Fairtrade does not monitor the costs to the farmer of 
achieving Fairtrade certification, and I have not found any study of these.  
Many anecdotes show that traders paid a higher price to farmers than Fairtrade 
cooperatives did, or that Fairtrade cooperatives paid a higher price, but very few of 
these anecdotes have any evidential value as they do not allow for the well-known 
practical and conceptual problems of collecting and analysing agricultural prices as 
described by Bowbrick (1988) for instance. Some examples of the problems that arise 
with the flagship product, coffee, will show the problems. 
A single ‘headline’ price is quoted when there is a wide range of prices on the 
market. Traders may choose to compare their price for specialty coffees with the 
Fairtrade price for standard grades, while Fairtrade supporters may compare their price 
for the highest quality organic coffee with the traders’ price for the very lowest 
qualities. In principle, one would like to compare the weighted average price for the 
mix of qualities produced on a ‘representative’ farm, but this begs the question of what 
is representative, especially since Fairtrade and non-Fairtrade farmers typically 
produce a different quality mix. And, of course, the mix of prices which is best for one 

 
12 
 
producer may not be the best for others. 
Coffee may be sold in different forms such as fresh cherry which would be 
processed by the trader or cooperative, as dry beans needing further processing, as 
parchment, etc. The price per pound is very different, even when the price of the final 
exported product, green coffee, is identical. Similar variations exist for most products. 
In economics and marketing it is normal to talk of the ‘price package’ of which 
the headline price, the cash payment, is just one component. For example, transport to 
the buying centre or factory, bags, inputs, sprays, and credit may be provided free, in 
which case the headline price is low. An important part of the price package is the 
availability and price of production credit and the promptness of payment when the 
crop is delivered. The cooperatives may pay a higher headline price, and then make 
deductions. Traders buying tree crops may buy under a range of contracts, including a 
payment per tree at the beginning of the season, with the trader doing some or all of 
the fertilizing, pruning, spraying, picking, packing, transport and processing, as well as 
taking all the risks of crop failure and price changes. In this case, de facto, the trader is 
the farmer and the peasant is the landlord. Farmers may quote any of these prices in a 
survey, and questionnaires should be designed to allow for the possibility that they 
quote prices that show they are being paid low prices. Typically traders and 
cooperatives will have different headline prices even if the price package is identical. 
Anecdotes frequently compare prices at different levels of the chain.2 It is formally 
impossible to calculate the ‘real’ price by regression, etc. 
Cooperatives typically average prices over a season, so they pay less than traders 
at some times of the year, more at others. Their members are always tempted to sell 
to traders at some periods, so not much can be read into frequent reports that this 
happens. A further complication is that cooperatives may average prices over a season, 
and have returns based on long-term contracts with buyers, sales on the futures 
markets, or the actual prices when the product is shipped to Britain and sold there 
some time months later. They commonly pay part of the price on delivery, with added 
payments as they get export returns, so the payment at any time may refer to 
deliveries made in previous crop years. Traders are more likely to base prices on spot 
markets, and may even pay a spot price with the proviso that there will be a further 
                                                     
2 One web page says that farmers ‘are often forced to sell to middlemen who pay 
them half the market price, generally between 30-50c per pound. Fairtrade coffee sells for a 
minimum of $1.26 per pound.’  (Organic Consumers Association, 2007) This comparison is 
flagrantly dishonest. The Fairtrade price quoted here is the New York price. The other price 
is the price paid in a village in the middle of Africa. Both the independent middlemen and 
the Fairtrade middlemen have to pay the costs of assembly, processing, marketing and 
transport, as well as the export tax, so both pay the farmer much less than the New York 
price. 
 

 
13 
 
payment if world prices rise later. Again, the date at which prices are compared is 
critical. 
Many academic researchers refer to traders and middlemen as ‘coyotes’3 a 
pejorative term. The same researchers admit, without apparently noticing the 
contradiction, that private traders play an essential role in the market: they buy a 
range of products that the cooperatives do not handle; they buy qualities of coffee, 
say, that cooperatives refuse to handle (and, again, farmers have to sell all they 
produce to survive); they provide credit, sometimes at lower interest rates than the 
cooperative; they pay higher prices at times; they pay promptly, not at the end of the 
season; they provide an alternative outlet when cooperatives become too corrupt, so 
that farmers are not at the mercy of a single monopsonistic buyer. And the farmers 
often choose to sell to them rather than to the cooperative. These are all part of the 
price package, so the ‘coyotes’ are providing an important market and range of services 
even to those farmers who sell mainly to Fairtrade cooperatives. 
A higher price does not necessarily mean a higher income to farmers. When most 
production of organic coffee is by members of Fairtrade cooperatives and the price of 
organic coffee is higher, then Fairtrade cooperatives pay a higher headline price. 
However, organic coffee has higher costs of production and lower yields, so, in some 
countries, organic farmers got substantially lower net cash incomes in spite of the 
higher headline price (Kilian, Jones, Pratt, & Villalobos, 2006, p. 327; Valkila, 2009; 
Wilson, 2009). 
Bassett (2009) found that Fairtrade and non-Fairtrade cotton growers had to sell 
to the same ginnery, as it had a locational monopsony, and that the ginneries were in a 
national cartel, so neither group got a fair price. 
The conclusion is that there is no evidence that Fairtrade farmers get a higher 
price than non-Fairtrade. There is no evidence that Fairtrade farmers get a fair price. 
 
Ethical implications 
Again, the implication is that there is an increase in Death and Destitution, both 
because of money intended for farmers not reaching them, and because donors give 
money to Fairtrade rather than to charities that deliver higher proportions of the 
donations.  Again there is Unfair Trading, both in the unsupported claims that Fairtrade 
farmers get higher prices and that they get a fair price, as well as in the suppression of 
evidence. 
                                                     
3 e.g. (Lyon, 2009, p. 230) (Garza & Cervantes, 2002, p. 15), (Cabañas, 2002, pp. 3,19,22,24,29), 
(Aranda & Morales, 2002, p. 15), (Boersma F. V., 2002, pp. 6,8,20), (Lyon, 2002, pp. 4,21,23,31), 
(Escalante, 2001), (Mendez, 2002, p. 20), (Taylor, 2002, p. 2), (Milford, 2004, pp. 49,52,55,58), (Ruben, 
Fort, & Zuniga-Arias, 2009), (Murray, Raynolds, & Taylor, 2003, p. 7), (Johannesen, 2008, pp. 
108,110,115) 

 
14 
 
 
 
What happens to the rest of the money 
Any extra money not spent on achieving certification and business expenses may 
be spent on social projects. Some of the social projects are building local schools, 
clinics, or baseball fields. Some of the projects are community (44% of expenditure on 
social projects), education (14%), environment (1%), health (10%), women’s 
programmes (5%) and others (25%) (Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International, 
2010). It is acceptable within the Fairtrade ethos that all the extra money is spent in 
this way and that none is passed on to farmers.  
Fairtrade does not control what the cooperatives do with the money or measure 
its impact. There is almost no published information by researchers on what extra 
money individual cooperatives get, and how much money they spend on each activity. 
There have been very few attempts at measuring the impact but, even if one ignores 
the methodological problems with these (which are discussed in a later section), it is 
not possible to take a tiny number of case studies of selected successful cooperatives, 
nearly all producing coffee, and to generalize the results to 3000 producers supplying 
thousands of products. 
There is no reason to assume that projects organized by cooperatives will have a 
greater impact than ones delivered by those aid organizations or governments which 
have a strong professional skill base, backup, resources and experience. Most aid 
projects also have economies of scale as they aim to help all farmers in a district, 
province, or country, not just the few hundred Fairtrade farmers. Agricultural 
economics and marketing interventions at sector level, industry level or crop level, for 
instance, typically help millions of people, and can be low-cost:high-impact. The 
Fairtrade projects are not low-cost:high-impact. There is a worry that the benefits of 
social projects may accrue mainly to the families of committee members and managers 
of the exporting cooperative, less to the families of committee members and managers 
of primary cooperatives, and least to the farmers. 
 
Ethical implications 
This section has shown Unfair Trading. The label should have another sentence, 
‘We have no evidence that any of the extra money you pay will produce any benefit to 
farmers’. It shows that the Fairtrade Foundation’s basic guarantee ‘A fair and stable 
price to farmers for their products’ (Fairtrade Foundation, 2011) is not, and cannot be, 
supported by the evidence. 
 
Fairtrade harms non-Fairtrade farmers 

 
15 
 
Fairtrade claims to help Third World farmers. If it harms any farmers while it is 
helping others, it certainly achieves less than it claims, and it may have the net overall 
effect of harming Third World farmers. The harm is aggravated if the farmers harmed 
are poorer than the farmers helped. Under the first set of criteria, this would be 
unethical, increasing Death and Destitution. Under the Unfair Trade criteria, Fairtrade 
is unethical if it does not tell consumers just who it is helping and who it is harming, 
and if it does not say whether the net impact is positive or negative. 
Any impact study is meaningless if it does not take into account the possibility 
that the Fairtrade farmers studied in a case study are better off solely because 
Fairtrade chose to work with farmers who were already better off, or because Fairtrade 
harmed the other farmers. 
 
Fairtrade helps the richer farmers 
Fairtrade concentrates its efforts on relatively rich farmers. Importers buy from 
the cooperatives that are efficient and can provide the qualities required at the time 
required and handle the paperwork. Inevitably the most healthy, skilful, educated 
farmers are most likely to do this, and they are the richest. The cooperatives with these 
farmers find it easier to meet the criteria of Fairtrade, to do the paperwork required 
and to make the investments involved. Farmers who do not wish to market through 
the local cooperative are excluded, as are older farmers, unskilled farmers, farmers 
who do not have access to research, marginal farmers, those in geographically remote 
or ecologically marginal areas, those who have less ability to pay for their labour, or 
those who do not have suitable cooperatives in their neighbourhood etc.  
Two thirds of the Fairtrade premium goes to middle income countries in South 
America and the Caribbean (Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International, 2010). But 
Mexico, one of the main Fairtrade supplying countries, has 70 times the GNP per head 
of Sierra Leone. The minimum wage of agricultural workers in Peru is $3 per day – 
unimaginable riches for many African and Asian farmers. 
Few people would be upset that a charity gives money to the rather better off 
rather than the very poor, as long as the donors are told to whom the money is going – 
this distribution of charity may not be ‘optimal’, but it is a step in the right direction. 
Few would be upset that a charity helps the poor in Britain, say, even though they are 
rich by international standards, as long as it is very clear about the intended 
beneficiaries. Not telling the donors would be Unfair Trading.  
 Some charities specialize in a single issue or a single technique, like Water Aid. If 
these allocate resources to get the maximum impact, they will complement the other 
sources of aid and charity. 
Once an organization sets itself up as an expert in the Third World, helping Third 

 
16 
 
World producers, as Fairtrade has, donors have a right to believe that it will allocate 
scarce resources rationally to get the maximum impact for the stated intended 
beneficiaries, or that it will tell them if it has other objectives. These ethical decisions 
on where to allocate funds are made routinely and constantly by governments, the 
major aid agencies and aid workers. In my book (2003), I show that, as an economist 
working on agricultural and food marketing in the Third World, I am constantly faced 
with such problems. I often know that people will die whatever course of action I 
recommend – there are not sufficient resources available to prevent deaths – and 
someone has to decide who will die, and how many of them.  
 
The Honeypot Effect 
Fairtrade enthusiasts claim the ‘Honeypot Effect’ as a major benefit, that other 
organizations give money to cooperatives, just because they are Fairtrade. It is very 
tempting for an NGO, government, agency or donor government to deliver aid or 
charity through a cooperative that is already well managed, that already gets aid from 
other agencies, that has skilled and educated members, and that has a comfortable 
rest house for visitors. It is easier and faster to deliver health and education to a 
cooperative that has already spent a little money on building a clinic and a classroom, 
with the donor providing staff, equipment, books and medicines. It means that 
demonstrable results are easier to achieve in the short run. Fairtrade cooperatives 
expect to get funding from six to twelve other organizations.4 This means that money 
is diverted away from the neediest, causing Death and Destitution. The same ethical 
problems arise if the effect is reversed, if Fairtrade chooses to work with those 
cooperatives that have rich and skilled farmers precisely because they already get aid 
from six to twelve other donors – a much more likely scenario. 
 
Reduced Mobility 
If, indeed, Fairtrade farmers are paid more for their coffee, these rich, skilled, 
farmers are less likely to switch into other crops which make better use of their skills 
and resources. This reduces the opportunities for very poor marginal farmers to take 
their place. 
 
Pushing down the World Price 
This subsection assumes that Fairtrade farmers are in fact getting the higher 
prices claimed, and examines the impact on other farmers. 
If Fairtrade farmers are paid a higher price and if they have a guaranteed 
                                                     
4 (Murray, Raynolds, & Taylor, 2003), (Valkila J., 2009, p. 3024), (Utting, 2009, p. 141), (Ronchi, 
2002), (Luetchford, 2006) 

 
17 
 
minimum price to reduce risk and increase expected price still further, they will 
increase production. Fairtrade and its enthusiasts claim that the proportion of the 
premium spent on agronomic advice substantially increases yields and reduces unit 
costs, providing an incentive to increase production in addition to the strong price 
response normally expected with coffee.  The world market price for coffee is famously 
inelastic, so a 1% increase in supply could lead to a 5% fall in the New York price. A 
coffee programme in Vietnam in the 1980s and early 1990s paid farmers above the 
world price, so its coffee production increased a hundredfold in the sixteen years 
1980/81 to 1996/97.5 A subsidized price for a few farmers halved the prices the other 
24 million farmers received. 
But this was the New York price, not the farm gate price. When the New York 
prices fall, the percentage fall at farm gate is much higher, because costs like road 
transport, shipping, processing and packaging are a fixed sum of money per pound. A 
10c fall in the New York price means a 10c fall in the farm gate price, which means that 
the net cash income of marginal farmers falls to zero – and these are the poorest 
farmers anyway, those who get the lowest prices in good times. 
Similarly, the minimum price for Fairtrade farmers means that when there is a 
glut on the world market it is never the Fairtrade farmers who have to cut down their 
trees, always the poorest farmers. 
 
Knocking competition 
There is a constant stream of marketing, advertising and propaganda attacking 
other marketing systems directly or indirectly. This must convince many consumers 
that these systems are evil, and it is a small jump to thinking that the products 
marketed are evil. And consumer demand for coffee has certainly fallen over the last 
20 years. This has also damaged the development of niche markets for specialty coffee 
which can pay farmers as much as three or four times the Fairtrade price. Traders claim 
that their markets for high-priced specialty coffee have been seriously damaged 
because consumers think it is more ethical to buy cheap Fairtrade coffee.  
Fairtrade claims to be the only true ethical trading organization.6 It is at least 
                                                     
5 International Coffee Organization statistics. There is an urban myth that this overproduction was 
caused by funding from the Asian Development Bank, and, in particular, the World Bank. In fact, the US 
veto on multinational loans to Vietnam meant that Vietnam was excluded from World Bank and ADB 
lending until 1993 (ADB, 2010) (US Department of State, 2010). The World Bank only began lending 
again in the rural sector in Vietnam after 1996. (World Bank, 2010).  It would normally take four years 
from planting of coffee to harvest, six years to full harvest. 
6 Fairtrade is at pains to distance itself from other ‘ethical trading’ organizations which may not 
have the same problems and which could be far more effective: ‘The most high-profile examples 
included the Rain Forest Alliance, Utz Kapeh (at Ahold supermarkets), and the Common Code for Coffee. 
However, it is important that consumers realize that these labels are not analogous with Fairtrade and 

 
18 
 
possible that other multi-issue ethical traders are more effective, and that a range of 
single issue groups are more effective than an organization with no clearly defined 
objectives. The possibility that the Rain Forest Alliance, for instance, might be more 
successful in raising environmental standards and that it might be a more cost-effective 
way of achieving objectives is ignored. 
There are also worries that Fairtrade is conflated with Trade Justice, a very 
different movement, and that this confusion is encouraged in Fairtrade’s publicity. 
 
Diversion of Aid and Charity 
The Fairtrade industry diverts aid and charity from higher impact projects. It gets 
gifts from governments, local governments, firms and individuals. It makes use of 
volunteers. It makes use of teachers who might otherwise be teaching the truth about 
the Third World. Some people regard Fairtrade as their one charitable donation. 
 
 
Ethical implications 
The Fairtrade industry certainly harms other farmers, especially the very poor. It 
is not a zero-sum game, with the benefits to one group exactly matching the costs to 
the other, partly because one group is nearer death, but also because the elasticity of 
demand for coffee means that paying Fairtrade farmers a bit more can devastate 24 
million others. 
 
IMPACT STUDIES 
Farmers incur costs in time and money in order to get Fairtrade certification, but 
it has been shown that little of the premium is passed on to them in cash, and there is 
no evidence that they get higher prices. This section examines claims that, in spite of 
this, impact studies show that they received benefits in some way. 
The formal monitoring and evaluation process for aid projects carried out by the 
aid agencies has two strands. First, there is strict monitoring of where the money goes 
and how it is spent, down to the level of each constituent project, which is not the case 
with Fairtrade. Second, there is evaluation to identify and quantify any impacts, 
positive or negative. Any evaluation should be rigorous, where failures can cause Death 
and Destitution. A meaningful impact study of Fairtrade must address the issues 
identified in previous sections. (Valuable and rigorous research has been done which 
does not purport to be an impact study, and which may not, therefore, address all 
                                                                                                                                                            
that the latter is the only market-driven mechanism that offers real positive impacts for disenfranchised 
producers.’ (Nicholls, 2008) 

 
19 
 
these issues.) 
First the impact study must identify what extra money was received by the 
exporting cooperative. Then it must identify what the cooperative spent its money on, 
according to the accounts, which is simple, and what it actually spent it on, which is 
more difficult, and may be dangerous. This prevents the researcher from claiming 
benefits from a school, say, which was not built, or which was built or operated by 
another organization. The actual number of days input from the Fairtrade Labelling 
Organizations’ advice should be set down.  
The Honeypot Effect makes it impossible to say which of the organizations 
produced any impact that might be noted in an impact study. A meaningful study 
would have to identify and measure the inputs of other organizations, NGOs, donor 
countries, aid agencies, government, etc. For example, claims that the introduction of 
organic coffee to Nicaragua was an impact of Fairtrade cannot be sustained, given that 
four specialist organic organizations can be shown to have had a significant effect 
(Valkila, 2009, p. 3019), and some support would have come from government and the 
aid agencies. These other inputs do not appear in the accounts of the cooperatives, so 
identifying and quantifying them is a substantial task. And, of course, the conclusions 
that are drawn depend on whether or not these interventions also impact on the 
control group. 
The costs of achieving certification are an unavoidable negative impact. The costs 
to the different levels of cooperatives, including certification and inspection fees paid 
to the Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International, can, in principle, be obtained 
from the accounts. The costs to farmers, in higher wage bills and extra time spent 
weeding instead of using herbicides, for instance, may be guessed at if there have been 
substantial farm management studies for the crop, studies including the measurement 
of labour inputs. Such studies are rare. Even here expert advice on interpretation is 
needed (e.g. what is the ‘value’ of family farm labour?). 
It has been shown above that it will generally be difficult to compare prices, and 
that significant conceptual problems arise which may make it impossible. The 
alternative of trying to identify economic impacts through changes in income is 
expensive. Farm management studies are required, rather than statements of ‘income’ 
if income changes are to be related to specific interventions. This is the approach used 
by aid agencies. Interpretation is difficult: as has been shown above, Fairtrade buyers 
typically go to cooperatives with skilled, educated, healthy, relatively rich farmers who 
get high prices because they can deliver consistent supplies of the qualities demanded, 
and these farmers will still be skilled, educated, healthy, relatively rich and achieving 
high prices even if Fairtrade has no economic impact.  
In the case of coffee, world prices have been rising since 2002, so any farmers 

 
20 
 
asked will report an increase in prices over a period which may coincide with the time 
they were Fairtrade members. The relative prices of Robusta and Arabica, say, on the 
world market are constantly changing, which could give the false impression that one 
group of farmers was doing relatively well because they were, or were not, members of 
a Fairtrade cooperative. 
It follows that any meaningful study must (a) cover the situation before and after 
the cooperative joins Fairtrade and (b) have a control group of non-Fairtrade farmers. 
The problems are well recognized, and baseline studies with control groups are 
standard for international aid. However the design of the Fairtrade system means that 
this raises horrendous sampling problems, expensive to tackle in all cases, and 
impossible to tackle in many situations. For example, should the controls be matched 
for income, education, family size, farm size, etc? Should they be matched for location, 
especially rainfall, soils, transport to market etc? Should they be matched for 
cooperative membership? Griffiths (2010b) shows how these problems invalidate one 
attempt at an impact study. 
If it is found that Fairtrade farmers are relatively better off than others after five 
years, it may mean that Fairtrade has harmed the others in some of the ways 
mentioned or it may mean that other factors have come into play, a change in the 
relative prices for some qualities, perhaps, or a drought in areas with no Fairtrade 
cooperatives perhaps. 
This means that it is impossible to do a meaningful impact study in most 
situations, especially when the opportunity to do a baseline study has been missed. In 
nearly all other situations the cost of doing a meaningful impact study is prohibitive, 
more than the average Fairtrade premium received by a cooperative. 
Fairtrade money is spent on social projects which may not produce any economic 
benefit. This means that studies which have attempted to find an impact have selected 
indicators like ‘organizational strength of producer co-operatives, individual self-
confidence’ (Nelson & Pound, 2009, p. 6), ‘wellbeing’ (p. 8), members who ‘recycle 
organic wastes’ (p. 9), ‘development of a new entrepreneurial spirit’ (p. 14), 
‘improvements in school attendance’ (p. 14), ‘increased confidence and self-esteem’ 
(p. 14),. Even if these indicators had been selected before doing a baseline study, one 
would ask, ‘Why these? Would other indicators be less favourable to Fairtrade?’ If they 
were not, one must wonder if they were part of an attempt to find some indicator that 
put Fairtrade in a good light. Using such indicators raises new methodological 
problems, in addition to those mentioned above.  
The fact that these problems exist is not an excuse for the failure to do impact 
studies, rather it is the serious failing of setting up a charity/aid system for which no 
monitoring or evaluation is possible, which is contrary to the ethical criteria of reducing 

 
21 
 
Death and Destitution and Unfair Trade. 
I do not know of any attempts at impact studies that address any of these 
problems. The British government aid organization, DfID, which has given millions to 
Fairtrade, admitted in a Freedom of Information enquiry that the division responsible 
for Fairtrade and ethical trade holds no evaluations of any sort whatsoever. In  
Fairtrade’s own Comprehensive Review of the Literature on the Impact of Fairtrade 
(Nelson & Pound, 2009), the authors, who have worked on Fairtrade over a dozen 
years, were able to find only 23 reports containing 33 separate case studies which they 
would accept as impact studies. They say ‘All of the reports are published academic 
and development agency studies, including journal articles, working papers and 
reports,’ (p 4) but, on examination, it is seen that they include an undergraduate 
dissertation; a master’s dissertation and a PHD thesis whose authors do not wish them 
to be published or disseminated; the same paper cited under two different references; 
reports written by employees or members of Fairtrade cooperatives; a paper 
cherrypicking from other, unobtainable, studies; and repeated studies of the same, 
successful, cooperatives. The standard survey reports are not available, so it is not 
possible to answer the standard questions: ‘Was the survey carried out at all?’, ‘Was 
the methodology, including the sampling, valid?’, ‘Do the data support the conclusions 
presented?’, ‘Do the data support alternative conclusions?’  The reports do not address 
the issues raised here. Even if the results were meaningful, it would be improper to 
generalize from a tiny number of case studies of selected successful cooperatives to 
3000 Fairtrade suppliers. 
 
POLITICAL OBJECTIVES 
The failures of Fairtrade identified above arise from the fact that the headline 
objective advertised to customers, ‘A fair and stable price to farmers for their products’ 
(Fairtrade Foundation, 2011), is not the main objective of many of its founders and 
managers. The main objective was political and could not be achieved using tried and 
tested methods of getting charity from the donor to farmers.  
As shown above, the adoption of market-based delivery of charity has meant that 
businesses in rich countries and cooperatives in poor countries could take most of the 
money donated. It has also made it impossible to monitor and control what happened 
to the donations. Because farmers are coerced into selling through cooperatives, they 
are tied to possibly inefficient buyers, and cannot sell to the buyers offering the best 
price package. 
This marketing system has also increased opportunities for corruption. Theft and 
corruption can make markets inefficient, so that less and less of the retail price reaches 

 
22 
 
the farmer and price signals are obscured.  Markets sometimes collapse as a result. For 
this reason both governments and industry organizations like the stock exchange try to 
set up marketing systems which minimize the opportunity and temptation to steal: 
they nurse them into existence and then tend them carefully. Reducing the temptation 
and opportunity is more important than detecting and punishing theft, which both 
governments and stock exchanges find difficult. The ethical aim is not just to protect 
individuals from theft, but to protect everyone using the market, directly or indirectly. 
The Fairtrade system provides more opportunities for theft than normal 
marketing systems. It uses the same retailers, wholesalers, packers, importers and 
commodity markets as the normal system. The big increase in the possibility of 
corruption arises because payments are not linked to observable product quality, but 
are a subsidy. If there is a subsidy of, say, 10% of the total price, then market 
intermediaries can steal anything up to 10% and still leave the intended recipients 
slightly better off and afraid to complain in case they lose the rest as well. For example, 
subsidized credit schemes often mean that farmers have to bribe the credit officer, 
bringing the true cost in line with the moneylenders’ interest rate. 
With normal charity it is possible to have strict financial controls. 
 
The ethics of politics and aid 
The code of ethics for aid workers requires that we do not indulge in politics. Any 
employee of the international agencies who did would be fired instantly. There are 
many reasons for this. It is likely to mean that we lose sight of the goals of our project 
and it fails. Local politicians or intended beneficiaries who dislike our politics may 
sabotage our project. Donors, whether governments or individuals, will be reluctant to 
finance aid if any significant proportion is seen to be supporting a political agenda they 
do not support, or prioritize. If one aid worker has a political agenda, it taints the 
reputation of all aid workers in that organization and perhaps other aid organizations 
as well. The use of aid as a weapon of war in Iraq and Afghanistan has meant that aid 
workers are now seen as legitimate targets (for the first time in my life) and that even 
workers for the Red Crescent and the UN, which are not involved in the war, have been 
killed. It is arrogant in the extreme for someone who happens to be allocating 
charitable funds to use the economic power that this gives to force their politics on 
peasants. 
Some charities are set up purely to achieve political objectives, and many of the 
objections fall away if the donors and people in the recipient country realize this. 
However, getting locals to adopt your political ideas and assert what you think are their 
democratic rights may get them imprisoned or murdered, while you, as a foreigner, 
merely get deported. And experienced aid workers know that it takes them years to 

 
23 
 
get some inkling of how a country’s political system really works – in one case it was 
widely believed that a country was pro-capitalist when it was Stalinist (Griffiths, 2003 
p83). The residents of the recipient country may well consider the charity to be 
patronizing and an abuse of economic power. Local politicians will be hostile to a 
charity which is a front for a political organization which threatens them personally, or 
their ideals, whether the charity supports US democracy, Scandinavian social 
democracy, Al Qaeda or Marxism – each of which is unacceptable in many countries. A 
certain political content seems to be acceptable with government-to-government aid. 
 
The Political and Marketing Revolution 
The objectives of Fairtrade, as shown by what is done rather than what is said, 
appear to be 
1. To build a new and sustainable marketing system that is fair and is better 
for Fairtrade farmers, which they assume to be a system based on 
agricultural marketing cooperatives. 
2. To change the world economic system, towards cooperative marketing. 
It is not suggested that these are consistent. 
These objectives mean that Fairtrade has to deliver the charity through the 
marketing system rather than through tried and tested charity systems, and it must 
deliver through cooperatives rather than possibly more efficient private traders, with 
the intention of promoting democracy and increasing the political and economic power 
of poor farmers. In addition it wants to promote standards for national governments 
(e.g. on trade unions and minimum wages), for cooperatives (on democracy and 
openness), and for farmers (on environmental cultivation, health and safety, and the 
role of women and children for instance). 
Historically, these objectives and the design of the system appear to have been 
derived from a desire for a political and marketing revolution. According to Boersma 
(2009), who is credited with founding the Fairtrade system, and others who agree with 
him (e.g. Audebrand and Pauchant (2009), Gendron and Rance (2009), Reed (2009), 
McMurtry (2009)), the belief is that this will lead to a new, non-capitalist, economic 
system. Indeed, it appears to imply a political and social revolution in South and Central 
America. This belief is not supported by political or economic analysis and there is no 
economic model of how such a system could work. No use is made of the vast amount 
of academic research and practical experience of agricultural marketing and 
cooperatives: evidence which is not challenged, nor assumed away, just ignored.  
Similarly, the evidence does not support the belief that producer marketing 
cooperatives will lead to a political revolution. The colonial project of the British Empire 
used cooperatives as one way of making the colonies economically viable, of training 

 
24 
 
the people in democracy and of enriching poor farmers, in order to create 
economically viable, self-governing democracies within the Empire. The cooperatives 
were usually successfully run, partly because of the support of colonial officers who 
advised on management, checked the accounts and prosecuted managers from time to 
time. The trade was strongly supported with Buy Empire Products campaigns and with 
trade policy, first Free Trade, then Imperial Preference, then the Sterling Area. In 
practice the cooperatives were not successful in ensuring democratic rule after 
independence, let alone a socialist revolution. The communist states of Eastern Europe 
built on the successful, pre-revolution, Imperial cooperative movement, but their 
cooperatives were so hated that foreign advisers are now warned never to mention the 
word ‘cooperative’ in these states. In Albania, members of cooperatives celebrated the 
downfall of communism by pulling down the cooperative buildings and dividing the 
bricks between members. Again, they did not produce democracy. Those European 
countries with a large number of successful producer marketing cooperatives, like 
France and the Netherlands, are not noticeably more democratic than their 
neighbours. 
Another ethical problem is that many of the key players do not believe that a 
revolution is desirable, not the customers, nor the supermarkets and manufacturers, 
and possibly not the farmers. Some people who do think revolution is desirable would 
like it to be achieved in other ways, or to have a different revolution. 
The Unfair Trading criteria suggest that, at the least, everyone should be told that 
this is an objective, and that it hampers the achievements of other objectives. 
 
Standards 
Cooperatives have to meet political standards to get Fairtrade certification. This 
sub-section shows that the standards divert money from farmers and can harm them. 
There are weaknesses in the design and enforcement of the standards. 
Fairtrade pays the social premium as a bribe (in the welfare economics sense) to 
coerce farmers and cooperatives to adopt standards which would not otherwise have 
been adopted. The bribe may be to cooperatives and their managers to get them to 
force farmers to adopt standards for which they get no benefit, not even the bribe. It 
would not be feasible to bribe individual farmers. 
The standards set by Fairtrade are not universally supported even in the rich 
world (though I, personally, would support some of them as political objectives in my 
own country) and it is arguable that they are inappropriate for very poor countries. The 
requirement that Fairtrade farmers pay higher wages for seasonal workers is fine as 
long as the crop is still profitable: if it is not, it means reduced production and income 
for the farmer, and reduced local employment for seasonal workers (Valkila, 2009, p. 

 
25 
 
3023). There is no reason to believe that Fairtrade gives higher prices to farmers which 
would make it possible for them to pay the higher wages. Poor farmers have no access 
to contraception and so have children to feed. If these children are to survive, they 
must work on the family farm. Fairtrade’s prohibition of child labour is fine if they pay 
the farmers enough extra to feed the children. They do not. Farmers complain that 
Fairtrade imposes environmental standards, on the use of herbicides for example, that 
almost no farmers in rich countries meet. These standards, they complain, are 
inappropriate for the producing country – how could someone in Switzerland draw up 
standards equally applicable to 70 countries with different climates, ecology and crops. 
The banning of herbicides also forces poor farmers to do weeks of backbreaking work 
in hot, humid, conditions to make people in rich countries feel better about themselves 
(Utting-Chamorro (2005); Moberg (2005)).  
 
Design of standards 
Quality experts talk of ‘inspector quality’ when quality control inspectors draw up 
a tick list of factors that are easy to measure but may have little to do with the quality 
of the product to the consumer or anyone else. Peter Fraser, author of CQI Body of 
Quality Knowledge, is critical of the design of the Fairtrade standards:  
‘To me they need to set clear overall objectives and policies for the movement, 
decide how they will achieve the objectives and comply with the policies, then 
say as little as possible about how people should go about it while ensuring that 
the overall objectives and policies are achieved and complied with.  The suppliers 
are the last group of folk who will want to comply with detailed regulations’. 
(2009) 
It is a basic result of the economics of quality that the more criteria that are 
introduced for a grade, such as Fairtrade, the less likely it is that the grade will actually 
reflect the quality of any buyer or anyone else. (Bowbrick, 1992) And Fairtrade has lots 
of criteria. (This is another reason why single issue charities may be more effective.) 
 
 
Enforcement of standards 
Fairtrade is a credence good. As with ‘kosher’, ‘free range’ or ‘organic’, customers 
cannot see whether it meets its specifications, and independent monitoring is needed 
to prevent Unfair Trading and, indeed, for the market to exist at all. Fairtrade Labelling 
Organizations International spend very little on this, less than 1m Euros per year, 
(Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International, 2010) and they charge the 
cooperatives for this.  
‘There are only 54 inspectors around the world, working on a part-time freelance 

 
26 
 
basis to check and control a million producers. These checks do not take place on 
the ground but in offices, hotel rooms or even by fax,’ (Christian Jacquiau cited in 
Hamel, 2006).  
Paola Ghillani, who spent four years as president of Fairtrade Labelling Organizations is 
equally critical (Hamel, 2006). She says that Max Havelaar (a European brand name of 
Fairtrade) is seriously weak when it comes to checks (Hamel, 2006). There is a lack of 
proper controls among smaller producers according to Ghillani (Hamel, 2006). There 
are many complaints of poor enforcement problems: Fairtrade does have quality 
problems (Lamb H., 2008, p. 41); labourers on Fairtrade farms in Peru are paid less 
than the minimum wage (Weitzman, 2006a, 2006b); some non-Fairtrade coffee is sold 
as Fairtrade (Weitzman, 2006); ‘the standards are not very strict in the case of 
seasonally hired labour in coffee production.’ (Valkila, 2009, p. 3023); ‘some fair trade 
standards are not strictly enforced’ (Reed, 2009, p. 12); supermarkets avoid their 
responsibility (Moore, Gibbon, & Slack, 2006). 
 
THE CREATION OF IGNORANCE 
 
Proctor’s (2008) work on agnotology, the study of the cultural creation of 
ignorance, shows how the tobacco industry replaced certainty – the clear scientific 
evidence that smoking causes cancer and heart disease – with doubt and ignorance on 
the matter among the general public and legislators. In the UK ignorance about 
Fairtrade, in the form of wildly unrealistic beliefs held by the general public and 
volunteers, has been created in a somewhat different way, largely by giving people the 
freedom to fantasize about Fairtrade, and encouraging them to do so. The beliefs may 
be held by employees of the Fairtrade organizations, by the manufacturers and 
supermarkets, and their employees, and by public relations and advertising staff selling 
the message as they understand it. Also important are the volunteers, activists, 
teachers, clerics etc. who promote it. And eventually it is the consumers who process 
what information they have to reach their own conclusions and tell their friends.  
Unquestionably, the Fairtrade advertising and public relations campaign has been very 
successful. 
 
Concealment 
As with tobacco, the concealment of information by the industry is the first step. 
Fairtrade should tell consumers, ‘We do not know how much extra you are paying, but 
in some cases 90% to 99% is pocketed by businessmen in rich countries as extra profit. 
On average less than 1% of the retail price is spent on social projects in the Third 

 
27 
 
World, but we do not know if farmers benefit from these. We have no reason to 
believe that any money reaches farmers in the form of higher prices, though farmers 
certainly incur extra costs to get Fairtrade certification.’ The ethical position is that it is 
Unfair Trading when  
‘a trader hides or provides in an unclear, unintelligible, ambiguous or untimely 
manner such material information .  .  .  or fails to identify the commercial intent 
of the commercial practice if not already apparent from the context, and where, 
in either case, this causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to take a 
transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise.’ (European 
Commission, 2005) 
The Fairtrade organizations, both UK and International, give a lot of publicity to 
the rapidly growing total retail value of goods bearing the Fairtrade label. They have 
repeatedly failed to publicize the actual amount reaching the Third World, though they 
routinely collect the figures when collecting their fees.  
Similarly, the figures I have calculated on how much is spent on business costs, 
women’s projects and environmental projects used information not available in 
previous years. If it had been communicated effectively, it is difficult to believe that 
there would have been the widespread belief that the money goes to Fairtrade farmers 
in the form of higher prices, or that there were substantial environmental projects. The 
information presented in the Annual Report is not evidenced, sourced or explained: it 
could be a guess, it could come from a survey, or it could come from the actual 
accounts of export cooperatives, in which case Fairtrade Labelling Organizations 
International have vastly more information than they care to release, information 
which independent researchers could usefully analyse. 
There is also a widespread belief that the Fairtrade organizations have a large 
team of expert advisers who give their suppliers a level of advice not available 
elsewhere on prices, marketing, processing, accounts, management, agronomy, etc: 
there are mentions of this advice in their literature and supporters claim it. But 
Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International does not say just how many people they 
employ on this and what they do. To give this range of advice for a large number of 
suppliers in 70 countries speaking English, French, Spanish, Portuguese etc., it would 
necessary to employ short term experts. If they are employed at the standard rates 
paid by the aid agencies – and the claim is that they are better than the standard 
experts – it is unlikely that the budget for ‘Producer Services & Relations’ (Fairtrade 
Labelling Organizations International, 2010) could pay for as many as 20 person years, 
spread very thinly indeed over the large number of suppliers. And it is by no means 
clear from the accounts that all this money is spent on this. While Fairtrade Labelling 
Organizations International claims they will provide the full accounts on request, they 

 
28 
 
do not do this, so a fuller analysis is impossible. 
Much of what does appear, on Fairtrade websites for instance, is extremely 
difficult to locate, or obscurely written. 
 
False information 
Some of the statements made by Fairtrade organizations, manufacturers and 
retailers and their staff are false or cannot be supported by the evidence, on how much 
reaches the farmers for instance. 
Another concern is the use of soundbites. Fairtrade UK makes strong use of a 
photograph of a smiling Third World farmer with a quote such as 
‘With Fairtrade small farmers have been transformed from marginalised 
farmers into businessmen’ Amos Wiltshire, Windward Islands Farmers 
Association (WINFA,) Dominica 
‘As well as receiving a higher income, the money enables us to fund 
projects such as computer courses for young people and adults’ Reginaldo 
Vincentim, Coagrosol Co-operative, Brazil. 
‘For us Fairtrade means conserving and improving our land and looking 
after the environment, it means improving the air that we breathe. It means 
education for our children and access to healthcare for our families… it means 
better opportunities above all for women, opportunities to organise and take 
decisions. Fairtrade means that producers and consumers work together for a 
better life. Fairtrade is much more than just a question of money.’ Blanca Rosa 
Molina, Cecocafen Coffee Co-operative, Nicaragua. 
‘We have taken our destiny into our own hands. Through Fairtrade and 
Kuapa we now have a lot of progress. We have good drinking water, toilet 
facilities and schools’ Comfort Kwaasibeam Kuapa Kokoo Union, Ghana. 
‘Fairtrade means more security, a bigger say and a better life for ourselves 
and our families.’ Raymond Kimary, Kilimanjaro Native Cooperative Union 
(KNCU), Tanzania 
These may be seen as an invitation to readers to believe first that these are a true and 
verifiable statement of the facts relating to that farmer’s cooperative, and, second, 
that it is reasonable to generalize from a single statement to all farmers and all 
cooperatives.  
Similarly there is cherrypicking of evidence: giving the correct statement that one 
cooperative has spent money on a clinic, another on a school, another on an 
environmental programme, and leaving it to readers to conclude that all cooperatives 
do all these.  
 

 
29 
 
 
Failure to correct false information 
There is a failure by the Fairtrade organizations to correct false statements made 
by their own staff and by the manufacturers and retailers selling Fairtrade products. 
And there is a failure to correct the false impressions that its volunteers, supporters 
and customers have fantasised. 
This is particularly worrying because Fairtrade responds rapidly to any criticisms 
in the press. And the quality of their response is even more worrying.  An ethical 
organization might be expected to respond, ‘We have investigated the complaint. It is 
incorrect for the following reasons.  .  .  Here is the evidence.’ Or ‘We have investigated 
the complaint. We have prosecuted the manager concerned and removed certification 
from one of the traders. Here is the evidence.’ Instead, the response is soundbites 
attempting to divert attention from the problem. Sidwell quotes ‘Lamb (2008), p. 114, 
where she lays out some of the large-scale charges made by Fairtrade’s critics, and 
then answers with an anecdote from one Fairtrade producer, “But Merling is 
unequivocal: Fairtrade has changed the lives of the farmers in her cooperative”.’ Other 
examples are Fairtrade’s reply to Sidwell (Fairtrade Foundation, 2008); Lamb’s (2008);   
reply to my (2008) article; Lamb (2006); Newman, (2006), and Fairtrade responses to 
Christian Jacquiau’s (2006, 2007) 500 page critique (Doussin, 2007; Hamel, 2006). 
 
CONCLUSION 
This paper set out several Utilitarian ethical criteria: that it is unethical to 
increase Death and Destitution, and that it is unethical to use Unfair Trading practices, 
both because it permits the increase of Death and Destitution, and because it could 
damage the credibility of charities.  
An alternative use of the donations would be to send it to the Third World, to 
help the very poor, those on the verge of starvation, in which case it would cut Death 
and Destitution. Instead, a minimum of 50% of the donation stays in rich countries and 
in some cases more than 99% does.  Much of the money that does reach the Third 
World goes on the costs of Fairtrade conformity and certification. Most of the rest goes 
on social projects. There is no evidence from impact studies that these benefit the 
Third World. There is no evidence that Fairtrade gives what they promise, ‘A fair and 
stable price to farmers for their products’. Fairtrade concentrates on the relatively rich, 
and there is reason to believe that it harms other farmers.  
Many of the weaknesses in the system arise from the political objectives of some 
of its founders. The aid workers’ code of ethics would not permit this. 
It can be argued that this system is only possible because the Fairtrade industry 

 
30 
 
makes false claims and suppresses significant information, which constitutes Unfair 
Trading. This has created the very effective marketing situation where consumers, 
supporters and volunteers are given the freedom to fantasize about what Fairtrade 
achieves. 
The Unfair Trading criteria suggest that Fairtrade goods should be clearly labelled 
‘This product costs x pence more than the equivalent non-Fairtrade product. Of this, y 
pence (z %) goes into social projects, but we have no evidence that these produce 
benefits to the farmers. We have no reason to believe that any extra money is paid to 
farmers, though they certainly incur extra costs to get Fairtrade certification. Non-
Fairtrade farmers are harmed. We spend much of the money trying to create a non-
capitalist political and economic system, which is set out on www.politicalagenda.com.’ 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
 
 
ADB. (2010). Asian Development Bank and Vietnam: Fact Sheet. Retrieved June 
14, 2010, from http://www.adb.org/Documents/Fact_Sheets/VIE.pdf 
Aranda, J., & Morales, C.: 2002, Poverty Alleviation through Participation in Fair 
Trade Coffee: The Case of CEPCO, Oaxaca, Mexico. Retrieved from 
http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/Sociology/FairTradeResearchGroup 
Audebrand, L., & Pauchant, T.: 2009, ‘Can the Fair Trade Movement enrich 
Traditional Business Ethics? An Historical Study of its founders in Mexico’, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 87, 343-353. 
Bahra, P.: 2009a,  ‘Fairtrade is struggling to change practices on tea estates and 
tackle abuses’. The Times January 2. 
Bahra, P.: 2009b, ‘Tea workers still waiting to reap Fairtrade benefits’, The Times 
January 7. 
Bassett, T.: 2009, ‘Slim pickings: Fairtrade cotton in West Africa’, Geoforum, 41, 
(1), 44-55. 
Berndt, C. E.: 2007, Is Fair Trade in coffee production fair and useful? Evidence 
from Costa Rica and Guatemala and implications for policy. Washington DC.: Mercatus 
65 Policy Series, Policy Comment 11, Mercatus Centre, George Mason University. 
Boersma, F. V.: 2002, Poverty Alleviation through Participation in Fair Trade 
Coffee Networks: The Case of UCIRI, Oaxaca, Mexico. Retrieved from 
http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/Sociology/FairTradeResearchGroup 
Boersma, F.: 2009, The urgency and necessity of a different type of market: the 
perspective of producers organized within the Fair Trade market. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 86, 51-61. 
Bowbrick, P.: 1988, ‘Are price reporting systems of any use?’ British Food Journal, 
90 (2) 65-69 March/April.  

 
31 
 
Bowbrick, P.: 1992, The Economics of Quality, Grades and Brands. London: 
Routledge. 
Cabañas, A. A.: 2002, Evaluation of the current and potential poverty alleviation 
benefits of participation in the Fair Trade market: The case of Unión La Selva, Chiapas, 
Mexico. San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Union of Societies of La Selva, 
Federation of Social Solidarity Societies. 
Doussin, J.-P.: 2007, ‘Max Havelaar Reply’, Le Monde Diplomatique, October p. 2. 
Dreher, A., Mölders, F., & Nunnenkamp, P.: 2010, ‘Aid Delivery through Non-
governmental Organisations: Does the Aid Channel Matter for the Targeting of Swedish 
Aid?’, World Economy, 33 (2), 147 - 176. 
Escalante, M. Y.: 2001, Transcription of the Workshop on Alternative Markets. 
Held in Tacuba, July 18. San Salvador, El Salvador: Shade, Livelihoods and Conservation 
Project- UCSC/PROCAFE/CFHF. 
European Commission.: 2005, Directive 2005/29/EC "Unfair Commercial Practices 
Directive". Retrieved May 27, 2011, from http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32005L0029:EN:NOT 
Fairtrade Foundation.: 2008, ‘Response to Adam Smith Institute Report’, 
Fairtrade Foundation Press Release, Feb 23. 
Fairtrade Foundation.: 2009, ‘Press Statement in response to Times article, “Tea 
workers still waiting to reap Fairtrade benefits”', World News from One World UK, 
January 7. 
Fairtrade Foundation.: 2011,  Are consumers getting a fair deal from Fairtrade 
products? Retrieved May 22, 2011, from Fairtrade.org.uk: 
http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/includes/documents/cm_docs/2008/R/1_Retail_pricing.p
df 
Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International.: 2010, Annual Report 2009-2010. 
Retrieved May 27, 2011, from 
http://www.fairtrade.net/fileadmin/user_upload/content/2009/resources/FLO_Annua
l-Report-2009_komplett_double_web.pdf 
Fairtrade UK.: 2009, Annual Report. Retrieved May 5, 2010, from 
http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/includes/documents/cm_docs/2009/2/2008_ar_fs.pdf 
Garza, V. P., & Cervantes, E.: 2002, Poverty Alleviation through Participation in 
Fair Trade Coffee Networks: The Case of Unión Majomut, Chiapas, Mexico. Retrieved 
from http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/Sociology/FairTradeResearchGroup 
Gendron, C., V., B., & Rance, A.: 2009, ‘The institutionalization of Fair Trade: more 
than just a degraded form of social action’,  Journal of Business Ethics, 86, 63-79. 
Griffiths, P.: 2003, The Economist's Tale: a consultant encounters hunger and the 
World Bank. London and New York: Zed Books. 
Griffiths, P.: 2008, ‘Why Fairtrade isn't fair’, Prospect, August. 
Griffiths, P.: 2010, ‘Lack of rigour in defending Fairtrade: a reply to Alastair 
Smith’, Economic Affairs, 30 (2) 45-49. 
Griffiths, P.: 2010b, ‘Refutation: Does Fair Trade deliver on its Core Value 
Proposition?’, Retrieved June 26, 2011, from 
http://www.griffithsspeaker.com/Fairtrade/Arnould%20et%20al%20web.pdf 

 
32 
 
Griffiths, P.: 2011, ‘Rejoinder: False Statements, Misrepresentation and 
Distortion in Defending Fairtrade’, Economic Affairs, 103-4. 
Hamel, I.: 2006, ‘Fairtrade Firm Accused of Foul Play’, Swiss Info 
http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/Fair_trade_firm_accused_of_foul_play.html?cid=535123
2 23/12/2009. 
Hill, M.: 2009, European Coffee Symposium, October 9. Retrieved from 
http://www.griffithsspeaker.com/Fairtrade/Who%20is%20telling%20the%20truth%20
4.wmv 
Jacquiau, C. ( 2006 ). Les Coulisees du Commerce Équitable. Paris: Mille et Une 
Nuits. 
Jacquiau, C. (2007). Max Havelaar ou les ambiguïtés du commerce équitable: 
Pourquoi le Sud rue dans les brancards. Monde Diplomatique September. 
Johannesen, S.: 2008, Producing and Consuming Narratives for Fairtrade. Masters 
thesis Norwegian University. 
Jones, S., & Bayley, B.: 2000, Fair Trade: Overview, Impact, Challenges Study to 
Inform DFID’s Support to Fair Trade. Oxford: Oxford Policy Management,. 
Kilian, B., Jones, C., Pratt, L., & Villalobos, A.: 2006, ‘Is Sustainable Agriculture a 
Viable Strategy to Improve Farm Income in Central America? A Case Study on Coffee’, 
Journal of Business Research, 59 (3), 322–330. 
Lamb, H. S. (2006). Trade audits do detect sales of non-certified coffee [REPLY]. 
Financial Times, September 13. 
Lamb, H.: 2008, ‘Fairtrade is Fair [Reply to Peter Griffiths, Fairtrade isn't Fair, 
Prospect Aug 2008]’. Prospect, September. 
Lamb, H.: 2008, Fighting the Banana Wars and other Fairtrade battles. London: 
Rider Books. 
Luetchford, P.: 2006, ‘Relations between Coffee Cooperatives and Alternative 
Trade Organizations—A View from Costa Rica’. In D. Lewis, & D. Mosse, Development 
Brokers and Translators: the Ethnography of Aid and Agencies Bloomfield, CT: 
Kumarian Press, pp. 127-148,. 
Lyon, S.: 2002, Evaluation of the Actual and Potential Benefits for the Alleviation 
of Poverty Through the Participation in Fair Trade Coffee Networks: Guatemalan Case 
Study. Retrieved from http: 
//www.colostate.edu/Depts/Sociology/FairTradeResearchGroup 
Lyon, S.: 2009, ‘What Good Will Two More Trees Do?’ The Political Economy of 
Sustainable Coffee Certification, Local Livelihoods and Identities’, Landscape Research, 
34, No. 2, 223–240, April. 
McMurtry, J.: 2009, ‘Ethical Value-Added: Fair Trade and the Case of Cafe 
Fenenino’, Journal of Business Ethics, 86, 27-49. 
Mendez, V. E.: 2002, Fair Trade Networks in Two Coffee Cooperatives of Western 
El Salvador: An Analysis of Insertion Through a Second Level Organization. Retrieved 
from http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/ Sociology/FairTradeResearchGroup  
Mendoza, R. (2002). ‘La paradoja del café, el gran negocio mundial y la peor crisis 
campesina’, Managua, Nitlapán-Universidad Centroamericana, Oxfam UK, CAFOD and 
Christian Aid.  Cited in Mendoza, R., & Bastiaensen, J. (2003).  

 
33 
 
Mendoza, R., & J. Bastiaensen, J. (2003). Fair Trade and the Coffee Crisis in the 
Nicaraguan Segovias. Small Enterprise Development , 14(2), 36–46. 
Milford, A.: 2004, Coffee, Co-operatives and Competition: The Impact of Fair 
Trade. Postterminalen, Norway: Chr. Michelsen Institute Development Studies and 
Human Rights. 
Moberg M (2005). “Fairtrade and Eastern Caribbean Banana Farmers: Rhetoric 
and Reality in the Anti-Globalization Movement.” Human Organization 64:4-16, Cited 
in Nelson and Pound (2009) p 10. 
Moore, G., Gibbon, J., & Slack, R.: 2006, ‘The mainstreaming of Fair Trade: a 
macromarketing perspective’,  Journal of Strategic Marketing, 14, 329-352. 
Murray, D., Raynolds, L., & Taylor, P.: 2003, One cup at a time: Poverty alleviation 
and Fair Trade coffee in Latin America. Colorado State University. 
Nelson, V., & Pound, B.: 2009, The Last Ten Years: A Comprehensive Review of the 
Literature on the Impact of Fairtrade. Retrieved from 
http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/resources/natural_resources_institute.aspx 
Newman, P.: 2006, ‘How the Fairtrade ethos seeks to protect the growers’, 
Financial Times, September 23. 
Nicholls, A.: 2008, Thriving in a hostile environment: Fairtrade’s role as a positive 
market mechanism for disadvantaged producers. Retrieved from 
http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/includes/documents/cm_docs/2008/a/alex_nichols.pdf 
Organic Consumers Association.: n.d., Starbucks Campaign. Retrieved May 22, 
2007, from http://www.purefood.org/Starbucks/coffeelabor.htm 
Proctor, R. N.: 2008, ‘Agnotology: a missing term to describe the cultural 
production of ignorance and its study’, In R. N. Proctor, & L. Shiebinger, Agnotology: 
The Making and Unmaking of Ignorance Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp. 1-36. 
Raynolds, L. T.: 2002, Poverty alleviation through participation in Fair Trade 
Coffee Networks: existing research and critical issues. Fort Collins: Colorado State 
University. 
Raynolds, L. T.: 2009, ‘Mainstreaming Fair Trade Coffee: from Partnership to 
Traceability’, World Development, 37 (6) 1083-1093. 
Reed, D.: 2009, ‘What do Corporations have to do with Fair Trade? Positive and 
normative analysis from a value chain perspective’, Journal of Business Ethics, 86, 3-26. 
Ronchi, L. (2002a). The Impact of Fairtrade on Producers and their Organisations. 
A Case Study with COOCAFE in Costa Rica.  
Ruben, R., Fort, R., & Zuniga-Arias, G.: 2009, ‘Measuring the impact of fair trade’, 
Development in Practice, 19 (6) August 777-788. 
Taylor, P.: 2002, Poverty Alleviation Through Participation in Fair Trade Coffee 
Networks: Synthesis of Case Research Question Findings. Colorado State University. 
Utting, K.: 2009, ‘Assessing the impact of Fair Trade Coffee: Towards an 
Integrative Framework’, Journal of Business Ethics, 86, 127-149. 
Utting-Chamorro, K. (2005). Does Fairtrade make a difference? The case of small 
coffee producers in Nicaragua. Development in Practice, , 15(3,4). 
Valkila, J., & Nygren, A. (2010). Impacts of Fair Trade certification on coffee 
farmers, cooperatives, and laborers in Nicaragua. Agriculture and Human Values , 

 
34 
 
27:321–333. 
Valkila, J., Haaparanta, P., & Niemi, N.: 2010, ‘Empowering Coffee Traders? The 
Coffee Value Chain from Nicaraguan Fair Trade Farmers to Finnish Consumers’, Journal 
of Business Ethics, 97, 257-270. 
Valkila, J.: 2009, ‘Fair Trade organic coffee production in Nicaragua - Sustainable 
development or a poverty trap?’ Ecological Economics, 68, 3018-3025. 
Weitzman, H. (2006, August 9). ‘Fair’ coffee workers paid below minimum wage. 
Financial Times . 
Weitzman, H. (2006, September 9). ‘'Ethical-coffee’ workers paid below legal 
minimum. Financial Times . 
Weitzman, H.: 2006, The bitter cost of ‘Fair Trade’ coffee. Financial Times, 
September 8. 
Wilson, B. R.: 2009, ‘Indebted to Fair Trade? Coffee and Crisis in Nicaragua’, 
Geoforum 41, (1), 84-92. 
World Bank. (2010). FAQs. Retrieved June 14, 2010, from 
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTSITETOOLS/0,,contentMDK:2026394
1~menuPK:534295~pagePK:98400~piPK:98424~theSitePK:95474,00.html 
 
 
 
 
 
