Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 1  
 
 
Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based 
Preventive Controls for Human Food: 
Draft Guidance for Industry1 
This draft guidance, when finalized, will represent the current thinking of the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA or we) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is 
not binding on FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the 
requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, 
contact FDA’s Technical Assistance Network by submitting your question at 
https://www.fda.gov/food/food-safety-modernization-act-fsma/fsma-technical-assistance-
network-tan. 
 
Appendix 1: Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards 
(“Potential Hazards”)  
 
Table of Contents 
A1.1 Purpose of Appendix 1 
A1.2 Terms, Abbreviations, and Resources 
A1.3 Requirement for a Hazard Analysis 
A1.4 How We Developed Appendix 1 
A1.5 Organization of Appendix 1 
A1.5.1 Food Groups Addressed by Appendix 1 
A1.5.2 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”) 
A1.5.3 Organization of Each Table in Appendix 1 
A1.5.4 The Food Subcategories in the Tables in Appendix 1 Address Raw Materials, 
Other Ingredients, and Multi-Component Foods 
A1.5.5 Food Categories/Food Subcategories that Are LACF 
A1.5.6 Infant Formula and Other Foods for Infants and Toddlers 
 
1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Food Safety in the Center for Food Safety and 
Applied Nutrition at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.   

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 2  
 
 
A1.6 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential 
Hazards”) in Appendix 1 
A1.6.1 Food-Related Biological Hazards 
A1.6.1.1 The most relevant food-related biological hazards 
A1.6.1.2 Note about viruses, parasites, and Shigella spp. 
A1.6.1.2.1 Viruses and parasites 
A1.6.1.2.2 Shigella spp. 
A1.6.1.3 Note about biological hazards in food subcategories manufactured using 
exceptionally lethal processes 
A1.6.1.4 Note about biological hazards in products produced in establishments that are 
under the jurisdiction of USDA 
A1.6.1.5 Note about biological hazards in infant formula and other foods for infants and 
toddlers 
A1.6.1.6 Note about biological hazards in food products produced using ingredients that 
are pasteurized or otherwise treated to control biological hazards 
A1.6.1.7 Note about biological hazards in food products that consumers cook 
A1.6.2 Food-Related Chemical Hazards 
A1.6.2.1 The most relevant food-related chemical hazards 
A1.6.2.2 Note about food allergen hazards and substances associated with a food 
intolerance or food-related disease 
A1.6.2.3 Note about radiological hazards, dioxins, PCBs, and toxic elements 
A1.6.2.4 Note about unapproved food and color additives 
A1.6.2.5 Note about toxic element hazards in foods for infants and toddlers, including 
infant formula 
A1.6.2.6 Note about mycotoxin hazards 
A1.7 Process-related Hazards and Facility-related Hazards 
A1.7.1 The Most Relevant Process-related and Facility-related Biological Hazards 
A1.7.2 The Most Relevant Process-related Chemical Hazards 
A1.7.3 The Most Relevant Process-related Physical Hazards 
A1.8 How to Use the Tables in Appendix 1 
A1.8.1 Appendix 1 Reflects a Tiered Approach to the Requirements for Hazard 
Analysis 
A1.8.2 Hazards that SMEs Recommended Be Identified as Known or Reasonably 
Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”) Might Not Apply to All Food 
Products in a Food Subcategory 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 3  
 
 
A1.8.3 Each Facility Determines, Through Its Hazard Analysis, Those Known or 
Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”) That Require a 
Preventive Control 
A1.9 References 
A1.10 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable (“Potential”) Food-
Related Biological Hazards 
Table 1A: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Bakery Items 
Table 1B: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Beverage Items 
Table 1C: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Miscellaneous Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS 
Substances 
Table 1D: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Chocolate and Candy 
Table 1E: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Dairy 
Table 1F: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Dressings, Condiments, and Dips 
Table 1G: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Egg and Egg Products 
Table 1H: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Fruits and Vegetables 
Table 1I: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Game Meat Products1 
Table 1J: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches 
Table 1K: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Nuts and Seeds 
Table 1L: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Oils and Oil Products 
Table 1M: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Snack Foods1 
Table 1N: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Soups and Sauces 
Table 1O: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Spices and Herbs 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 4  
 
 
Table 1P: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological 
hazards for Food Sweeteners (Nutritive and Non-Nutritive) 
A1.11 Tables of Potential Food-Related Chemical Hazards 
Food Group 2A: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Bakery Items 
Table 2B: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Beverage Items 
Table 2C: Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS Substances 
Table 2D: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Chocolate and Candy 
Table 2E: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Dairy 
Food Group 2F: Dressings, Condiments, and Dips 
Table 2G: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Egg and Egg Products 
Table 2H: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Fruits and Vegetables1 
Table 2I: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Game Meat Products 
Table 2J: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches 
Table 2K: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Nuts and Seeds 
Table 2L: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Oils and Oil Products 
Food Group 2M: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Snack Foods 
Food Group 2N: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Soups and Sauces 
Table 2O: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Spices and Herbs 
Table 2P: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Food Sweeteners (Nutritive and Non-Nutritive) 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 5  
 
 
A1.1 Purpose of Appendix 1 
The guidance in Appendix 1 is intended to help you identify known or reasonably foreseeable 
biological, chemical, and physical hazards for each type of food manufactured, processed, 
packed, or held at your facility. Identifying known or reasonably foreseeable hazards is one step 
in determining, through your hazard analysis, which hazards require a preventive control. (See 
21 CFR 117.130(a)(1).) Throughout this guidance: 
• 
We use the term “potential hazard” as a synonym for “known or reasonably foreseeable 
hazard” for the following reasons: 
o Some users of this Appendix 1 could be more familiar with the term “potential hazard” 
because “potential hazard” is used in food safety systems such as HACCP that are 
similar to, but not the same as, the system of hazard analysis and risk-based preventive 
controls in part 117;  
o “Potential hazard” is a term that is used in some training materials to help emphasize 
during training that a known or reasonably foreseeable hazard is still being evaluated to 
determine whether it is a hazard requiring a preventive control for a food; and 
o Form 2-B in Appendix 2 of this guidance (Hazard Analysis) uses the term “potential 
hazard” as a shorthand for “known or reasonably foreseeable hazard” due to space 
limitations.2  
• 
With the exception of Form 2-B, when appropriate, in this guidance we use3 the combined 
term “known or reasonably foreseeable hazard (“potential hazard”)” (or, depending on 
context, “known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard”) so that this guidance: 
o consistently uses the term used in the regulatory text of part 117 to unambiguously direct 
you to the regulatory requirements that are the subject of this guidance;  
o consistently uses a term that could be more familiar to some users of this guidance; and 
o consistently reminds you that a known or reasonably foreseeable hazard is still being 
evaluated to determine whether it is a hazard requiring a preventive control for a food. 
 
A1.2 Terms, Abbreviations, and Resources 
See the following sections in the Introduction of this guidance for terms, abbreviations, and 
resources as follows: 
• 
Section III.A: Glossary of terms that are used in this guidance and are defined in 21 CFR 
117.3; 
• 
Section III.B: Glossary of terms that are defined for use in this guidance but are not defined 
in 21 CFR 117.3; 
• 
Section IV: Table of Abbreviations that are used in this guidance; and 
 
2 We intend to modify Form 2-B to explain that it uses “potential hazard” as a synonym for “known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazard.”  
3 We intend to modify chapters already available as draft guidance to consistently use both terms. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 6  
 
 
• 
Section VI: Resources that could be useful in developing and implementing your food safety 
plan. 
We organized the resources in section VI in the Introduction of this guidance in a series of 
tables as shown in Table A1-1:  
Table A1-1 Resource Tables in Section VI in the Introduction of This Guidance  
Table No. in 
Section VI of the 
Introduction 
Table Title 
3 
FDA Compliance Policy Guides Cited as a Resource in this Guidance 
4 
FDA Guidance for Industry Cited as a Resource in this Guidance 
5 
FDA Compliance Programs and Import Alerts Cited as a Resource in 
this Guidance 
6 
Codex Standards, Codes of Practice, and Guidelines Cited as a 
Resource in this Guidance 
7 
Resources for Designing Validation Studies 
8 
Additional Resources Cited in this Guidance 
When we cite a resource that is listed in one of the tables in section VI of the Introduction of this 
guidance, we refer you to the applicable Table in the Introduction for information on how to 
access the resource. For example, if we cite to “CPG Sec. 555.400 Aflatoxins in Human Food: 
Guidance for FDA Staff,” we refer you to Table 3 in section VI of the Introduction. 
These resources are available as of the date that we make this guidance available. We have 
verified the website addresses listed for these resources, as of the date that we make the 
Introduction of this guidance available, but websites are subject to change over time. In addition, 
the policies, recommendations, and information in these resources can change over time. We 
recommend that you periodically review websites listing FDA’s CPGs, FDA’s Guidance for 
Industry, FDA’s Compliance Programs and Import Alerts, and Codex Standards, Codes of 
Practice, and Guidelines for new or modified policies, recommendations, and information. 
A1.3 Requirement for a Hazard Analysis  
Part 117 defines and uses three terms (i.e., “hazard,” “known or reasonably foreseeable 
hazard,” and “hazard requiring a preventive control”) to establish a tiered approach to the 
requirements for hazard analysis and risk-based preventive controls. The term “hazard’ is the 
broadest of these three terms – e.g., any biological, chemical (including radiological), or physical 
agent that has the potential to cause illness or injury. To conduct your hazard analysis: 
• 
You start with the universe of all hazards that are relevant to food safety.  
• 
Through the “hazard identification” phase of your hazard analysis, you then narrow this 
universe of all hazards relevant to food safety to those hazards that are “known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazards” (“potential hazards”) for each type of food manufactured, 
processed, packed, or held at your facility – i.e., those biological, chemical (including 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 7  
 
 
radiological), and physical hazards that are known to be, or have the potential to be, 
associated with your facility or your food. These “known or reasonably foreseeable hazards” 
(“potential hazards”) are the hazards that you evaluate in your hazard analysis. 
• 
Through the “hazard evaluation” phase of your hazard analysis, you then determine the 
subset of those known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) that are 
hazards requiring a preventive control – i.e., those known or reasonably foreseeable 
hazards for which a person knowledgeable about the safe manufacturing, processing, 
packing, or holding of food would, based on the outcome of a hazard analysis (which 
includes an assessment of the severity of the illness or injury if the hazard were to occur and 
the probability that the hazard will occur in the absence of preventive controls), establish 
one or more preventive controls to significantly minimize or prevent the hazard in a food and 
components to manage those controls (such as monitoring, corrections or corrective actions, 
verification, and records) as appropriate to the food, the facility, and the nature of the 
preventive control and its role in the facility's food safety system.  
(See the definitions of “hazard,” “known or reasonably foreseeable hazard,” and “hazard 
requiring a preventive control” in 21 CFR 117.3 and the discussion of the term “potential hazard” 
in section A1.1 of this Appendix 1. See the requirement for a hazard analysis in 21 CFR 
117.130.) 
Chapter 2 of this guidance: 
• 
provides an overview of the requirements for hazard analysis and recommendations for 
steps to take before beginning a hazard analysis;  
• 
describes a “Hazard Analysis Worksheet” that is a resource that you can use in conducting 
your hazard analysis; and 
• 
provides recommendations for a step-by-step approach to conducting the hazard 
identification and hazard evaluation phases of the hazard analysis to determine those 
known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) requiring a preventive 
control. To do so, Chapter 2: 
o includes a series of questions you can ask during the hazard identification phase 
required by 21 CFR 117.130(b) to help narrow the universe of hazards that are relevant 
to your facility and your food products to the known or reasonably foreseeable hazards 
(“potential hazards”);  
o provides recommendations for conducting the hazard evaluation phase required by 21 
CFR 117.130(c) to determine which known or reasonably foreseeable hazards 
(“potential hazards”) require a preventive control through consideration of the severity of 
the illness or injury if the hazard were to occur, an evaluation of environmental 
pathogens in certain circumstances, and an evaluation of a series of factors and their 
effects on the safety of the finished food for the intended consumer; and 
o briefly discusses the types of preventive controls (e.g., process controls, food allergen 
controls, sanitation controls, and supply-chain controls) that could be applied when the 
outcome of the hazard evaluation phase of the hazard analysis is that a known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazard (“potential hazard”) requires a preventive control.  
Chapter 3 of this guidance is an in-depth resource that provides background information about 
the most relevant biological, chemical, and physical hazards that could be associated with a 
facility or a food. For example, Chapter 3 includes several “Quick Reference Guides” that help 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 8  
 
 
you to identify common sources of biological, chemical, and physical hazards. However, 
Chapter 3 does not provide an exhaustive compendium of biological, chemical, and physical 
hazards or all known details about each biological, chemical, or physical hazard that Chapter 3 
discusses. 
We recommend that you use the information in Chapters 2 and 3 to help you determine which 
hazards that we identify in the Tables in this Appendix as known or reasonably foreseeable 
hazards (“potential hazards”) for specific types of food products are hazards requiring a 
preventive control for your food products. See also the notes in sections A1.6.1 (regarding food-
related biological hazards), A1.6.2 (regarding food-related chemical hazards), and A1.7 
(regarding process-related hazards and facility-related hazards). 
A1.4 How We Developed Appendix 1 
The PCHF requirements apply to a broad array of food products. To develop guidance on 
hazards that could be known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) for 
specific types of food products, we consulted subject matter experts (SMEs) within CFSAN. We 
also contracted with a third-party consultant tasked to identify and retain recognized SMEs 
within the food industry and academia to provide input during this process.   
We consulted with CFSAN’s SMEs, and the consultant worked with its SMEs to identify 16 
Food Groups and Food Categories and Food Subcategories within each Food Group. The 
consultations with these SMEs included their recommendations on the most relevant hazards 
that should be identified as known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) for 
subsequent hazard evaluation by each facility that produces food products in the Food 
Subcategories to determine which hazards require a preventive control as appropriate to the 
facility and its food products. Resources that SMEs used for this purpose included scientific 
publications (including information from the books of the International Commission on 
Microbiological Specifications for Foods and publications from the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention), published data from the FDA Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts 
Website (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance), published FDA databases 
(such as the Pesticide Residue Monitoring Program Reports and Data (Table 8 in section VI of 
the Introduction of this guidance)) and unpublished FDA databases (such as the database used 
to store reports to the Reportable Food Registry4 and FDA surveillance databases) available to 
CFSAN SMEs. 
In 2016, we first made Appendix 1 available as draft guidance for public comment (81 FR 
57816, August 24, 2016). The 2016 draft Appendix 1 included three sets of Tables of known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) – one for biological hazards, one for 
chemical hazards, and one for process-related biological, chemical, and physical hazards. After 
considering public comments, we revised Appendix 1 and are making this revised Appendix 1 
available as a revised draft guidance for public comment. This revised Appendix 1 only includes 
two sets of Tables of known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) – one for 
biological hazards and one for chemical hazards. This revised Appendix 1 no longer includes a 
table of known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) for process-related 
biological, chemical, and physical hazards, because process-related hazards generally are 
unique to each facility based on its operations and processes. Instead, section A1.7 
recommends that each facility identify known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) process-
 
4 Aggregate information is available to the public from the FDA-TRACK: Reportable Food Registry Data 
Dashboard (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 9  
 
 
related hazards for its products based on its knowledge, experience, and history of hazards 
associated with its operations, using the recommendations provided in Chapter 2 of this 
guidance in combination with the information provided in Chapter 3 of this guidance. Similarly, 
section A1.7 recommends that each facility identify known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) facility-related hazards for its products based on its knowledge, experience, and 
history of hazards associated with its facility, using the recommendations provided in Chapter 2 
of this guidance in combination with the information provided in Chapter 3 of this guidance. 
Although Appendix 1 is comprehensive, it is not exhaustive and only reflects data and 
information available as of 2022. New information about hazards that could be associated with 
certain types of food products could become available in the future. In addition, Appendix 1 
does not address specialty ingredients such as seaweed (other than seaweed extracts such as 
carrageenan), proteins extracted from plants (e.g., protein extracted from peas), proteins 
produced through microbial fermentation (e.g., egg-white protein produced through yeast 
fermentation), and microorganisms (e.g., Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp.). 
Information that you could use to evaluate known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
hazards in such ingredients includes technical data sheets provided by the supplier, and 
specifications that are established in the Food Chemicals Codex or an FDA regulation or that 
are described in FDA’s response to a GRAS notice.5 If you do not find readily available 
information about known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazards in an ingredient, you 
could check with the supplier of the ingredient. 
While Appendix 1 is a comprehensive starting point, each facility has the ultimate responsibility 
to identify the hazards relevant to food manufactured, processed, packed, or held at that facility, 
such as hazards that are associated with its facility-specific history even though they are not 
identified as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazards in the tables. 
A1.5 Organization of Appendix 1 
A1.5.1 Food Groups Addressed by Appendix 1 
We organized Appendix 1 around 16 Food Groups, identified as Food Groups A through P: 
• 
Food Group A: Bakery Items 
• 
Food Group B: Beverage items 
• 
Food Group C: Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS Substances 
• 
Food Group D: Chocolate and Candy 
• 
Food Group E: Dairy 
• 
Food Group F: Dressings, Condiments, and Dips 
• 
Food Group G: Egg and Egg Products 
• 
Food Group H: Fruits and Vegetables 
• 
Food Group I: Game Meat Products 
 
5 For information about GRAS notices and FDA’s response to GRAS notices, see our website (Table 8 in 
section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 10  
 
 
• 
Food Group J: Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches 
• 
Food Group K: Nuts and Seeds 
• 
Food Group L: Oils and Oil Products 
• 
Food Group M: Snack Foods 
• 
Food Group N: Soups and Sauces 
• 
Food Group O: Spices and Herbs 
• 
Food Group P: Food Sweeteners (Nutritive and Non-Nutritive) 
 
A1.5.2 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential 
Hazards”) 
We organized the information regarding known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential 
hazards”) in Appendix 1 as follows: 
• 
Section A1.10 includes Tables 1A through 1P, which list the most relevant6 food-related 
biological hazards in Food Subcategories in the 16 Food Groups. These Tables are 
marked (with an “X”) for those food-related biological hazards that SMEs recommended be 
identified as known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) for subsequent 
hazard evaluation by a facility that produces food products in those Food Subcategories to 
determine which hazards require a preventive control, as appropriate to the facility and its 
food products.  
• 
Section A1.11, which lists the most relevant food-related chemical hazards, is organized 
around the same 16 Food Groups as those addressed in section A.1.10.  
o In 12 of these 16 Food Groups, Tables 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, 2G, 2H, 2I, 2J, 2K, 2L, 2O, 
and 2P list the most relevant food-related chemical hazards in Food Subcategories. 
These Tables are marked (with an “X”) for the most relevant7 food-related chemical 
hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or reasonably foreseeable 
hazards (“potential hazards”) for subsequent hazard evaluation by a facility that 
produces food products in those Food Subcategories to determine which hazards 
require a preventive control as appropriate to the facility and its food products. 
o In four of these 16 Food Groups (i.e., Bakery Items; Dressings, Condiments, and Dips; 
Snack Foods; and Soups and Sauces), the known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) chemical hazards depend on the ingredients used. To maintain the overall 
organization associated with the 16 Food Groups, section A1.11 includes an entry for 
that Food Group (i.e., Food Groups 2A, 2F, 2M, and 2N) and recommends that you 
refer to the Tables most applicable to the ingredients you use.  
 
6 In determining the most relevant biological hazards to list in the Tables, we first selected 12 of the major 
pathogens identified as being associated with foodborne illness in the United States. (Scallan et al., 
2011.) As discussed in section A1.6.1.2.2, we subsequently deleted Shigella spp. from the relevant 
biological hazards listed in the Tables. 
7 For information on factors that we considered in determining the most relevant chemical hazards to list 
in the Tables, see section A1.6.2.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 11  
 
 
For more information about the hazards in these Tables, see chapter 3 and section A1.6. 
A1.5.3 Organization of Each Table in Appendix 1 
Each Table in Appendix 1 represents one Food Group, which is identified in the title of the 
Table. Below, we describe the elements of these Tables. 
• 
Food Category: The main subdivision within each of the 16 individual Food Groups 
• 
#: A code (with a number or a number/letter combination) assigned to each Food 
Subcategory 
• 
Food Subcategory: Descriptive details to distinguish food items within the Food Category. 
See section A1.5.4 for more information about the Food Subcategories. The Food 
Subcategories may not include “niche” food products, raw materials, or ingredients that 
result from an evolution of food products over time. 
• 
Storage Conditions: The Tables for most (but not all) Food Groups specify storage 
conditions for Food Subcategories in that Food Group. For example, the Tables for Bakery 
Items identify three storage conditions (e.g., refrigerated storage, frozen storage, and 
ambient storage) that apply to specific subcategories of Bakery Items.  
• 
Hazards: See Chapter 3 for detailed information about the hazards that are most relevant to 
food safety. An “X” marks those hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazards ("potential hazards") for subsequent hazard evaluation by a 
facility that produces food products in those Food Subcategories to determine whether these 
are hazards that require a preventive control as appropriate to the facility and its food 
products. For help in determining which of these recommendations apply to your food 
product and might be hazards requiring a preventive control as appropriate to your facility 
and your food, see Chapter 2 and Chapter 3 and the discussion in section A1.8. 
• 
Comments: In general, your knowledge of your food product (e.g., ingredients, intended use, 
and storage conditions) should enable you to identify the Food Category and Food 
Subcategory that best represents it. However, although some products obviously fall into a 
Food Category and Subcategory, others may not. For example, “chocolate chip cookies” 
obviously fall into the Food Category Brownies/Cookies, but it may not be obvious that the 
Tables consider biscotti to be a “cookie.” Therefore, the Comments provide examples of 
products that may not obviously fall into a Food Category and Subcategory.  
Importantly, the food products in a Food Subcategory, and the sources of food ingredients in the 
Food Subcategories, are diverse. As a result, the recommendations of SMEs in the Tables in 
Appendix 1 may not always apply to all food products in that Food Subcategory. See the 
recommendations in section A1.8 regarding how to use the Tables in this Appendix, including 
discussion that hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) might not apply to all food products in a Food 
Subcategory; each facility determines, through its hazard analysis, those known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) that require a preventive control. 
Food products evolve and, thus, over time there will be food products that are not addressed in 
the Tables of potential hazards.  If you identify a Food Subcategory that has characteristics of 
your food product, you may still be able to use the Tables in Appendix 1 to help you identify 
known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) that warrant evaluation to 
determine whether they are hazards requiring a preventive control for your food product. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 12  
 
 
A1.5.4 The Food Subcategories in the Tables in Appendix 1 Address Raw 
Materials, Other Ingredients, and Multi-Component Foods  
Most foods contain multiple raw materials and other ingredients. Although many of the foods in 
the Tables are multi-component foods, it is not practical to include all multi-component foods in 
the tables, because the ingredients and processing methods can vary widely (e.g., entrées, side 
dishes, sandwiches). To assess the biological and chemical hazards for these multi-component 
foods, you should consider the hazards associated with the individual raw materials/ingredients, 
as well as the hazards that may arise from the processing methods used in making them.  
Some Tables, such as the “Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS Substances” Food 
Group Table, address food materials that are almost exclusively used as ingredients in the 
production of other foods. Examples of foods in the “Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS 
Substances” Food Group are emulsifiers, stabilizers and thickeners, enzymes, colors, flavors, 
and other ingredients (such as antimicrobials and preservatives).  
Other Tables address Food Groups with Food Categories and Food Subcategories that are 
both commonly used as raw materials or other ingredients in the production of multi-
component foods and commonly consumed as finished foods. When using these Tables, the 
known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) that you should consider for an 
ingredient that you use in manufacturing/processing one of these food products could depend 
on how you use the ingredient. For example: 
• 
Food products that are in the “Whole, Grains” Food Subcategory in Table 1J (e.g., barley, 
quinoa) are commonly sold both to manufacturers/processors for use as an ingredient in 
multi-component foods and to consumers. Multi-component foods manufactured/processed 
using whole grains as an ingredient can be dry foods (such as dry mixes that consumers 
use in cooking) or high-moisture foods (such as cooked grain bowls and cooked grain-based 
side dishes) in which the whole grains are hydrated during manufacturing/processing. You 
should consider Bacillus cereus as a known or reasonably foreseeable hazard (“potential 
hazard”) when you use the whole grains to manufacture/process a cooked high-moisture 
product (where B. cereus could grow), but not when you distribute dry whole grains to 
consumers or use the dry whole grains to manufacture/process a dry mix that consumers 
will cook. 
• 
Food products that are in the “Dry Mixes, Powders” Food Subcategory in the “Soups, 
Sauces, Gravies” Food Category in Table 1N are commonly sold both to 
manufacturers/processors for use as an ingredient in multi-component foods (such as 
refrigerated or frozen meals) and to consumers (e.g., for use in an entrée prepared at home 
by rehydration followed by cooking). You should consider pathogenic sporeformers such as 
B. cereus and C. perfringens as known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential 
hazards”) when you use a dry mix or powder as an ingredient of a sauce that you use to 
manufacture/process a frozen meal, but not when you use the dry mix or powder to 
manufacture/process a dry sauce mix packaged for retail sale to consumers. 
• 
Food products that are in the “Dried, Ground, Cracked, or Whole” Food Subcategory in the 
“Spices” Food Category in Table 1O are commonly sold both to manufacturers/processors 
for use as an ingredient in multi-component foods (such as high-moisture dips, sauces, and 
refrigerated and frozen meals) and to consumers (e.g., for use in an entrée prepared at 
home). You should consider pathogenic sporeformers such as B. cereus and C. perfringens 
as known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) when you use a product 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 13  
 
 
in this Food Subcategory to manufacture/process high-moisture foods such as dips, sauces, 
and refrigerated and frozen meals (where high moisture could allow growth of pathogenic 
sporeformers), but not when you use a dry product in this Food Subcategory to 
manufacture/process a dry spice mix. 
Some Food Categories and Food Subcategories could apply to more than one Table. For 
example, oil-based flavor extracts from plants appear in the oil-based liquid Subcategory of the 
Flavor Category in Table 1C (Miscellaneous Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS 
Substances) as well as in the essential oil Subcategory in the Seasonings Category in Table 1O 
(Spices and Herbs). As another example, the category/subcategory of dairy-based ready-to-
drink beverages appear in Table 1B (Beverage Items) as well as in the cultured milk products 
subcategory of the milk and butter category in Table 1E (Dairy Products). 
A1.5.5 Food Categories/Food Subcategories that Are LACF  
The PCHF requirements do not apply with respect to activities that are subject to the LACF 
regulations (21 CFR part 113) for the control of biological hazards and, thus, LACF foods are 
not covered by the Food Categories/Food Subcategories in Tables 1A through 1P (Food-
Related Biological Hazards). (See 21 CFR 117.5(d).) C. botulinum would be the biological 
hazard associated with an LACF used as an ingredient; the hazard would be controlled by the 
supplier.  
The PCHF requirements do apply to chemical and physical hazards that could be associated 
with an LACF food. The Tables in section A1.11 address chemical hazards that you should 
consider for LACF. For example, for the known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical 
hazards associated with a canned vegetable, you should look at Table 2H, which addresses the 
Food Group Fruits and Vegetables.   
A1.5.6 Infant Formula and Other Foods for Infants and Toddlers 
Infant formula is a specialized, multi-component food. The Food Categories/Food Subcategories 
in the Tables in Appendix 1 do not list infant formula. When you manufacture/process an infant 
formula, you should consider whether there are known or reasonably foreseeable biological or 
chemical hazards (“potential biological or chemical hazards”) associated with the ingredients of 
that infant formula.  
The Food Categories/Food Subcategories in the Tables in Appendix 1 do not specifically 
identify “baby food,” such as pureed fruits and vegetables intended for consumption by infants 
and toddlers. When you manufacture/process a food intended for consumption by infants or 
toddlers, you should look for a broader term applicable to that food. For example, for “baby 
food” that contains fruit, you could look at the Heat-Treated Fruit Products Subcategory or any 
of the other fruit-related Subcategories in Tables 1H and 2H. For “baby food” that contains a 
vegetable, you could look at any of the vegetable-related Subcategories in Tables 1H and 2H.   
See also the discussion of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards in 
infant formula and other foods for infants and toddlers in section A1.6.1.5 and the discussion of 
known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards in infant formula and other 
foods for infants and toddlers in section A1.6.2.5. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 14  
 
 
A1.6 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential 
Hazards”) in Appendix 1 
A1.6.1 Food-Related Biological Hazards  
A1.6.1.1 The most relevant food-related biological hazards 
Chapter 3 of this guidance provides background information (e.g., characteristics of 
microorganisms that can contaminate food and potential sources of these microbial 
contaminants) for the following food-related biological hazards that are most relevant to food 
safety:  
• 
Bacillus cereus 
• 
Clostridium botulinum 
• 
Clostridium perfringens 
• 
Brucella spp. 
• 
Campylobacter spp. 
• 
Pathogenic E. coli 
• 
Salmonella spp. 
• 
Listeria monocytogenes 
• 
Shigella spp. 
• 
Staphylococcus aureus 
• 
Parasites 
• 
Viruses 
As discussed in section A1.3, Chapter 3 does not provide an exhaustive compendium of 
biological, chemical, and physical hazards. Likewise, Tables 1A through 1P do not include an 
exhaustive list of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards. For example, 
Tables 1A through 1P do not list the biological hazard Cronobacter spp. (including C. sakazakii) 
because Cronobacter spp. (including C. sakazakii) is largely a hazard for powdered infant 
formula rather than a hazard applicable to foods for the general population.8 However, Table 1E 
(for the Food Category Dairy) notes that the SMEs recommend considering Cronobacter spp. 
(including C. sakazakii) as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard in 
powdered milk intended for use in infant formula.  
Many RACS that are raw materials or ingredients in food products could be contaminated with 
multiple known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards. In many cases, 
processing to control the most common of these known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
biological hazards for a Food Subcategory would also control biological hazards that are less 
common. For example, the most common known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
 
8 The draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 did not discuss Cronobacter 
spp. When we finalize that chapter, we intend to add a discussion of Cronobacter spp. and applicable 
references. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 15  
 
 
biological hazard for raw cocoa beans is Salmonella. Processing to control Salmonella would 
also control less common known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for 
raw cocoa beans (such as L. monocytogenes and pathogenic E. coli). Therefore, Table 1D only 
identifies Salmonella as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard for 
raw cocoa beans. 
A1.6.1.2 Note about viruses, parasites, and Shigella spp.  
In food establishments subject to part 117, contamination of food with biological hazards that 
are viruses (e.g., norovirus and hepatitis A virus), parasites (e.g., Cryptosporidium spp., 
Cyclospora cayetanensis, and Giardia intestinalis) or the bacterial pathogen Shigella spp. by 
food handlers generally is addressed by following the CGMPs such as those relevant to worker 
hygiene and disease control. (See 21 CFR 117.10.)  Likewise, when an entity that supplies 
produce to a food facility for use as an ingredient in a food product is subject to our produce 
safety regulation entitled “Standards for the Growing, Harvesting, Packing, and Holding of 
Produce for Human Consumption” (21 CFR part 112), that supplier addresses biological 
hazards that are viruses, parasites, or Shigella spp. by following provisions such as the 
standards for Health and Hygiene in part 112, subpart D. For waterborne viruses and parasites 
and for Shigella spp. (which can be present due to fecal contamination), a supplier of produce 
that is subject to 21 CFR part 112 would also follow the standards for Agricultural Water in part 
112, subpart E9.   
A1.6.1.2.1 Viruses and parasites 
There are very few Food Subcategories in which the SMEs identified viruses or parasites as 
known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for subsequent hazard 
evaluation to determine whether they are hazards requiring a preventive control. In the “Fruits 
and Vegetables” Food Group (see Table 1H), these Food Subcategories are: 
• 
“Whole RAC” Food Subcategory in the “Fruits” Food Category;   
• 
“Fresh-cut” Food Subcategory in the “Processed Fruits” Food Category;  
• 
“Whole or Cut” (Frozen) Food Subcategory in the “Processed Fruits” Food Category; and  
• 
“Whole RAC” Food Subcategory in the “Vegetables” Food Category.  
Note that footnotes in Table 1H identify specific foods for which the SMEs identified viruses or 
parasites as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for subsequent 
hazard evaluation within the Food Category.  
In the “Game Meat” Food Group (see Table 1I), the SMEs identified the parasite Toxoplasma 
gondii as associated with wild boar, deer and elk and considered that Trichinella spp. is 
primarily a problem with wild game such as wild boar, bear and walrus. This guidance does not 
address hazards associated with wild game meat, only farm-raised game meat. Thus, Table 1I 
 
9 In 2019, FDA extended the dates for compliance with the provisions of part 112, subpart E for covered 
produce other than sprouts (84 FR 9706, March 18, 2019). The compliance dates range from January 26, 
2022, through January 26, 2024, depending on the size of a covered farm. In 2021, FDA proposed to 
amend the agricultural water provisions of the produce safety regulation that covered farms have found 
complex and challenging to implement (86 FR 69120, December 6, 2021). In that proposed rule, FDA 
announced its intent to exercise enforcement discretion for these subpart E requirements while pursuing 
a targeted compliance date rulemaking, with the goal of completing the rulemaking as quickly as possible. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 16  
 
 
only identifies Toxoplasma gondii as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological 
hazard for deer and elk that are farmed for commercial meat distribution. 
A1.6.1.2.2 Shigella spp. 
Outbreaks of foodborne shigellosis have been associated with contaminated raw vegetables 
such as lettuce salads, shredded cabbage, green onions and parsley (Beuchat, 1996; Long et 
al., 2002; Naimi et al., 2003), and the SMEs identified Shigella spp. as known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for subsequent hazard evaluation for these raw 
vegetables in the “Fruits and Vegetables” Food Group. The SMEs also identified Salmonella 
and/or pathogenic E. coli as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for 
these raw vegetables in the “Fruits and Vegetables” Food Group. If you identify Salmonella 
and/or pathogenic E. coli as a hazard requiring a preventive control, a preventive control that 
you establish and implement to significantly minimize or prevent Salmonella or pathogenic E. 
coli generally would also significantly minimize or prevent Shigella spp. Therefore, we decided 
that it was not necessary to separately identify Shigella spp. as a known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard for subsequent hazard evaluation in any Food 
Group, and none of the Tables in section A1.10 list Shigella spp. as a known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard. 
A1.6.1.3 Note about biological hazards in food subcategories manufactured 
using exceptionally lethal processes  
Some food products can only be produced using exceptionally lethal processes that adequately 
control biological hazards. If the processing is not conducted in a way that adequately controls 
biological hazards, the product would not be suitable for distribution. Due to the exceptional 
lethality of the processes used to manufacture these food products, in some instances the 
SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for 
these foods (e.g., sugar confections in Table 1D and crackers in Table 1M). In other instances, 
the tables indicate known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards, but a 
facility could determine these are not hazards requiring a preventive control because they are 
produced using an exceptionally lethal process (e.g., soups, sauces and gravies, where some of 
the products receive an exceptionally lethal process but other products do not).    
For example: 
• 
A process of making caramel by boiling ingredients such as sugar, butter, and sweetened 
condensed milk for several minutes to about 240oF (116oC) would provide exceptional 
lethality for biological hazards (e.g., Listeria monocytogenes); without boiling for several 
minutes, the ingredients will not result in a chewy caramel when cooled. Thus, the SMEs did 
not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated 
with the “Sugar Confections” Food Subcategory (e.g., caramels) in the “Chocolate and 
Confectionery Products” Food Category (Table 1D). 
• 
A process of making jam, jelly, or chutney by a process that includes boiling would provide 
exceptional lethality for biological hazards (e.g., pathogenic E. coli, Salmonella species 
(spp.), and Listeria monocytogenes); without boiling these products will not thicken to the 
desired consistency. Thus, the SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) biological hazards associated with the “Jams, Jellies, Chutneys” Food 
Subcategory in the “Processed Fruits” Food Category (Table 1H).  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 17  
 
 
• 
A process of making a shelf-stable acid or acidified fruit cocktail would provide exceptional 
lethality for biological hazards (e.g., pathogenic E. coli, Salmonella spp., and Listeria 
monocytogenes). The process for making the fruit cocktail that can be stored at ambient 
temperatures is designed to inactivate certain non-pathogenic sporeformers that could 
cause spoilage; these sporeformers have much greater heat resistance than the vegetative 
pathogens that are the biological hazards in the ingredients. The SMEs identified several 
known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated with the 
Subcategory “Heat-Treated Fruit Products” in the “Processed Fruits” Food Category (Table 
1H) but noted that some of these foods may receive an exceptionally lethal process.  
• 
A process of making a gravy by boiling or cooking down a liquid sauce to thicken it would 
provide exceptional lethality for vegetative pathogens such as E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella 
spp. and Listeria monocytogenes, and, if one of these is the pertinent pathogen in an 
ingredient, you may not need to consider it as a known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) biological hazard. (Alternatively, your PCQI could identify vegetative pathogens 
such as E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp. or Listeria monocytogenes, as known or 
reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for ingredients used in making gravy, 
but determine that they do not require a preventive control because the process is 
exceptionally lethal.) The SMEs identified several known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) biological hazards associated with the Subcategories in the “Soups, Sauces, 
Gravies” Food Category (Table 1N) but noted that some of these foods may receive an 
exceptionally lethal process.  
• 
A baking process (e.g., 482oF (250oC) for 4.5 min.) used in the manufacture of snack 
crackers would provide exceptional lethality for vegetative pathogens such as E. 
coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes; without this high temperature 
process, the baked and cooled product would not have or retain the characteristic texture 
desired for this snack item. Thus, the SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated with the “Baked, Unfilled, 
Unseasoned or Seasoned” Food Subcategory in the “Crackers” Food Category (Table 1M). 
 
A1.6.1.4 Note about biological hazards in products produced in 
establishments that are under the jurisdiction of USDA  
The production of certain meat products (but not game meat products), poultry products, and 
processed egg products (e.g., pasteurized liquid whole egg) is subject to regulation by USDA’s 
FSIS under the statutes it administers (i.e., the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et 
seq.), the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C 451 et seq.), and the Egg Products 
Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 1031 et seq.). None of the Food Groups in Appendix 1 is directed to 
products while under the sole jurisdiction of USDA’s FSIS. However, some FSIS-regulated 
products are sometimes used as ingredients in food products that are subject to our regulation 
under the FD&C Act and produced in accordance with the requirements of part 117. For 
example, in the Food Group “Egg and Egg Products” the Food Category “Further Processed 
Egg Products” subcategory “Cooked Egg Products” includes products such as egg patties 
(which can be an ingredient in breakfast sandwiches) that can be made with liquid whole egg, 
an FSIS-regulated food. If you use a food product that is produced under the jurisdiction of 
USDA’s FSIS as an ingredient in your food product, you should determine, through your hazard 
analysis, whether a hazard you identify as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
biological hazard in that ingredient is a hazard requiring a preventive control.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 18  
 
 
In the Federal Register of October 29, 2020 (85 FR 68640), FSIS published a final rule to apply 
the egg products regulations to egg substitutes (e.g., egg whites) and freeze-dried products 
(e.g., freeze-dried breakfast items for outdoor recreation) and require inspection of these 
products. The final rule is effective October 30, 2023. The Food Group “Egg and Egg Products” 
no longer includes egg substitutes and freeze-dried products. 
A1.6.1.5 Note about biological hazards in infant formula and other foods for 
infants and toddlers 
As discussed in section A1.5.6, the Food Categories/Food Subcategories in the Tables in 
Appendix 1 do not list infant formula or other foods for infants or toddlers. When you 
manufacture/process an infant formula or other food for infants or toddlers, you should consider 
whether there are known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated 
with the ingredients in that infant formula or other food for infants and toddlers.  
Importantly, the controls to prevent adulteration from microorganisms in our infant formula 
regulations in 21 CFR part 10610 specify criteria for when a powdered infant formula that 
contains Cronobacter spp. or Salmonella spp. will be deemed adulterated under sections 
402(a)(1), 402(a)(4), and 412(a)(3) of the FD&C Act. You must comply with these 
microbiological criteria when you manufacture/process powdered infant formula. (See 21 CFR 
106.55(e).) 
A1.6.1.6 Note about biological hazards in food products produced using 
ingredients that are pasteurized or otherwise treated to control biological 
hazards 
Many biological hazards that could be in ingredients are controlled by pasteurization or other 
treatment that is performed by the supplier of those ingredients. For example, in many 
circumstances your supplier would control known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
biological hazards in milk-based ingredients used to make products such as dairy-based 
beverages, cream, cultured milk products, and cheese, or in egg-based ingredients used to 
make products such as some condiments. Tables 1A through 1P list the known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards that could be in a food product due to the ingredients 
in the food product regardless of whether the outcome of the hazard analysis is that a hazard 
that requires a preventive control is controlled by you (e.g., by a process control) or by your 
supplier.  
A1.6.1.7 Note about biological hazards in food products that consumers 
cook 
In some cases, the outcome of your hazard analysis for foods such as uncooked fruit pies could 
be that known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards will be controlled by 
consumer cooking rather than by a preventive control.   
 
10 Infant Formula Requirements Pertaining to Current Good Manufacturing Practice, Quality Control 
Procedures, Quality Factors, Records and Reports, and Notifications 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 19  
 
 
A1.6.2 Food-Related Chemical Hazards 
A1.6.2.1 The most relevant food-related chemical hazards 
Chapter 3 of this guidance provides background information11 (e.g., characteristics of chemicals 
that can contaminate food and potential sources of these chemical contaminants) for the 
following food-related chemical hazards that are most relevant to food safety:  
• 
drug residues in milk, honey, and game meat;  
• 
environmental contaminants (e.g., dioxins and PCBs); 
• 
food allergens and substances associated with a food intolerance or food-related disease 
(e.g., sulfites, gluten); 
• 
toxic elements12 in or on produce ingredients; 
• 
mycotoxins13 in commodities such as grains, apples, peanuts, and tree nuts; 
• 
natural toxins (such as hypoglycin A in ackee and cyanogenic glycosides in cassava 
(yuca)14); 
• 
pesticides in or on produce RACs15; 
• 
radiological hazards; and 
• 
unapproved food or color additives.  
The Tables in section A1.11 address drug residues, toxic elements, mycotoxins/natural toxins, 
and pesticides. As discussed in sections A1.6.2.2 through A1.6.2.4, these Tables do not 
 
11 A reference that we did not include in draft Chapter 3 of this guidance is the European Union's Rapid 
Alert System for Food and Feed (RASFF) (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). 
RASFF enables information to be shared efficiently between its members when risks to public health are 
detected in the food chain. The RASFF portal features an interactive searchable online database. It gives 
public access to summary information about the most recently transmitted RASFF notifications as well as 
the ability to search for information on any notification issued in the past. When we finalize Chapter 3, we 
intend to identify RASFF as a resource for you to use in determining whether a chemical hazard is a 
known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard requiring a preventive control. 
12 The discussion in the draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 focused on 
the toxic elements that are heavy metals. When we finalize that chapter, we intend to discuss toxic 
elements more broadly, consistent with the discussions of toxic elements in FDA’s “Closer to Zero” action 
plan (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). Import Alert 99-42 (Table 5 in section VI 
of the Introduction of this guidance) covers specific firms that have offered foods with levels of heavy 
metals that may render a product injurious to health and that may be detained without physical 
examination in accordance with the guidance in FDA's Regulatory Procedures Manual Chapter 9-8 (Table 
8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance).  
13 FDA’s Import Alert 23-14 identifies mycotoxins associated with certain food types (Table 5 in section VI 
of the Introduction of this guidance). 
14 The draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 did not identify cyanogenic 
glycosides as a natural toxin. When we finalize that chapter, we intend to include cyanogenic glycosides 
as a natural toxin. 
15 See Liang et al., 2021 and FDA’s Pesticide Residue Monitoring Program Reports and Data for 
commodities associated with pesticides (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 20  
 
 
address food allergens, substances associated with a food intolerance or food-related disease, 
radiological hazards, dioxins, and unapproved food or color additives.  
As discussed in Chapter 3, the PCHF requirements specify that you must consider, as part of 
your hazard identification, known or reasonably foreseeable hazards that may be intentionally 
introduced for purposes of economic gain (21 CFR 117.130(b)(2)(iii)) and recommends that you 
focus on circumstances where there has been a pattern of such adulteration in the past. 
Chapter 3 includes a quick reference guide (Table 3-8) that lists circumstances where there has 
been a pattern of such adulteration in the past and identifies additional resources that you can 
use for this purpose. The Tables in section A1.11 do not further address known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards that may be intentionally introduced for purposes of economic gain. 
A1.6.2.2 Note about food allergen hazards and substances associated with 
a food intolerance or food-related disease  
See the discussion of food allergen hazards in Chapter 3.16 The Food Allergen Labeling and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2004 (FALCPA) amended the FD&C Act and defined the following 
eight foods and any ingredients that contain protein derived from these eight foods (with certain 
exemptions noted in section 201(qq)(2) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 321(qq)(2)), including highly 
refined oils) as major food allergens: milk, eggs, fish, crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts, 
wheat, and soybeans. In 2021, the Food Allergy Safety, Treatment, Education, and Research 
Act of 2021 (FASTER) amended the definition of "major food allergen" to add sesame to that 
definition, effective for food that is introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate 
commerce on or after January 1, 2023. 
A food allergen hazard can occur due to an undeclared food allergen in your food product or in 
raw materials or other ingredients that you receive from a supplier. A food allergen hazard also 
can occur due to unintended allergen presence17 that can occur during production of your food 
product or during production of raw materials or other ingredients that you receive from a 
supplier. As a result, a food allergen hazard could be identified as a known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazard for a majority of food products. Rather than identifying 
food allergen hazards as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards for 
most food subcategories, the Tables of food-related chemical hazards do not address food 
allergen hazards.  
As discussed in Chapter 3, for some consumers, certain substances can cause hypersensitivity 
reactions. Like food allergens, these substances are lawfully used in food. Also, like food 
allergens, some of these substances are subject to labeling requirements. For example, some 
sulfiting agents must be listed on the ingredient label unless they are added to food as an 
“incidental substance”; sulfiting agents are considered to be incidental only if they have no 
technical effect in the finished food and are present at less than 10 parts per million (ppm) (21 
CFR 101.100(a)(4)). Because such substances generally are intentionally added to food (rather 
than be contaminants that could be unintentionally added to food), the Tables of food-related 
chemical hazards do not address these substances.  
 
16 For information on controlling food allergen hazards, see Chapter 11 of this guidance.  
17 We use the term “unintended allergen presence” to mean the presence of an allergen due to allergen 
cross-contact. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 21  
 
 
A1.6.2.3 Note about radiological hazards, dioxins, PCBs, and toxic 
elements  
See the discussion of radiological hazards in Chapter 3. Radiological hazards rarely occur in the 
food supply. There are two primary sources of radiological hazards: 
• 
water: the primary source of water that could be contaminated with radiological hazards is 
well water in specific areas in the United States where high concentrations of some 
radionuclides, such as radium-226, radium-228, and uranium, have been detected in well 
water; and 
• 
accidental contamination, e.g., contamination arising from accidental release from a nuclear 
facility or from damage to a nuclear facility from a natural disaster. 
Radiological hazards that result from contaminated well water or from accidental contamination 
can affect almost any Food Subcategory. Rather than identify radiological hazards as known or 
reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards for all food subcategories, the Tables of 
food-related chemical hazards do not address radiological hazards. We recommend that you 
consider the information in Chapter 3 regarding radiological hazards when conducting your 
hazard analysis for your food products. 
See also the discussion of dioxins and PCBs, which are environmental contaminants18, in 
Chapter 3. Because dioxins and PCBs rarely occur in the food supply and are largely 
associated with accidental contamination, the Tables of food-related chemical hazards do not 
address dioxins or PCBs. 
Table 3-1 in Chapter 3 identifies four heavy metals (which we now refer to as “toxic elements”) 
as chemical hazards that can contaminate food: arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury. This 
Appendix does not address mercury, which is principally a hazard in seafood products that are 
not covered by this guidance. 
Water is an ingredient in many food products. If you source a water-containing food from a 
geographic area in which water has been contaminated with toxic elements, you may need to 
consider whether a toxic element is a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard for 
your food product (Keurig Dr Pepper, 2019; see also FDA Import Alert 99-42 in Table 5 in 
section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). 
A1.6.2.4 Note about unapproved food and color additives  
See the discussion of food additives, color additives, and GRAS substances in Chapter 3, 
including the statutory framework applicable to substances that are added to food. An 
unapproved food or color additive that results from use of a substance that is not lawful for use 
in food can affect almost any Food Subcategory. Rather than identify unapproved food or color 
additives as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards for all food 
 
18 The draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 did not discuss perchlorates 
and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), which can result from industrial contamination. When we 
finalize that chapter, we intend to include perchlorates and PFAS as examples of environmental 
contaminants. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 22  
 
 
subcategories, the Tables of food-related chemical hazards do not address unapproved food 
and color additive hazards.  
A substance that is GRAS under the conditions of its intended use is not subject to the 
premarket review and approval requirements applicable to food and color additives. Although 
some GRAS substances are listed in our regulations, other GRAS substances are lawfully used 
in food without being listed in our regulations. 
Some food and color additives are specifically prohibited from use in food because we have 
determined that the chemical additive poses a potential risk to public health (see 21 CFR part 
189 and 21 CFR 81.10). Examples of such food and color additives are coumarin (21 CFR 
189.130), safrole (21 CFR 189.180), and FD&C Red No. 4 (“Red No. 4”) (21 CFR 81.10(d)). We 
consider a prohibited food additive or color additive to be an unapproved food additive or color 
additive for the purposes of the PCHF requirements and, thus, to be a chemical hazard.  
We recommend that you consider the information in Chapter 3 to reduce the potential for an 
unapproved food or color additive in your food products. We intend to update Chapter 3 to 
highlight the following resources: 
• 
Food and color additive regulations. The most relevant regulations are in: 
o 21 CFR part 73: Listing of Color Additives Exempt from Certification 
o 21 CFR part 74: Listing of Color Additives Subject to Certification 
o 21 CFR part 172: Food Additives Permitted for Direct Addition to Food for Human 
Consumption 
o 21 CFR part 173: Secondary Direct Food Additives Permitted in Food for Human 
Consumption 
• 
The Color Additive Status List and the Food Additive Status List (Table 8 in section VI of the 
Introduction of this guidance) 
• 
Lists of substances that are used in food under the GRAS provisions of the FD&C Act, 
including: 
o 21 CFR part 182: Substances Generally Recognized as Safe 
o 21 CFR part 184: Direct Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe 
o GRAS Notice Inventory (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) 
 
A1.6.2.5 Note about toxic element hazards in foods for infants and toddlers, 
including infant formula 
As discussed in section A1.5.6, the Food Categories/Food Subcategories in the Tables in 
Appendix 1 do not list infant formula or other foods for infants and toddlers. When you 
manufacture/process an infant formula or other food for infants or toddlers, you should consider 
whether there are known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards associated 
with the ingredients in that infant formula or other food for infants or toddlers.  
FDA’s “Closer to Zero” action plan (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) 
identifies actions we will take to reduce exposure to toxic elements from foods eaten by babies 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 23  
 
 
and young children. We have prioritized babies and young children because their smaller body 
sizes and metabolism make them more vulnerable to the harmful effects of these contaminants. 
The “Closer to Zero” action plan follows a four-stage iterative approach that includes research, 
regulatory, and outreach efforts to lead to the development of action levels for certain toxic 
elements in categories of baby foods (e.g., cereals, pureed fruits and vegetables) and other 
foods commonly eaten by babies and young children.  
This guidance does not identify specific action levels for any toxic element hazards in foods for 
infants and toddlers. Instead, we identify action levels or other recommendations for reducing 
toxic elements in foods for infants and toddlers in more specific guidance such as Compliance 
Policy Guides (Table 3 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) and Guidance for 
Industry (Table 4 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). For example, as of the date 
of publication of this Appendix, our Guidance for Industry addresses arsenic in rice cereal, 
arsenic in juice, lead in juice, lead in food intended for babies and young children, and lead in 
candy likely to be consumed frequently by small children (Table 4 in section VI of the 
Introduction of this guidance). You should check our "Closer to Zero: Action Plan for Baby 
Foods” website (Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance), and our websites 
listing Compliance Policy Guides and Guidance for Industry, for such action levels on a regular 
basis, because the action plan’s iterative approach can lead to adjustments in any announced 
action levels on an ongoing basis. 
A1.6.2.6 Note about mycotoxin hazards  
As discussed in Chapter 3 and in our Compliance Program19 7307.001 (Mycotoxins in Domestic 
and Imported Foods) (Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance), mycotoxins are 
a common group of natural toxins that include aflatoxin, fumonisin, deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin), 
ochratoxin, and patulin. Mycotoxins are toxic metabolites produced by certain fungi (i.e., molds) 
that can infect and proliferate on agricultural commodities (e.g., grains such as wheat and corn, 
peanuts, fruits, and tree nuts) in the field and during storage. Specific mycotoxins are most 
commonly associated with certain commodities as follows: 
• 
aflatoxin: peanuts, dried corn, tree nuts, and some edible seeds20 (melon seeds, pumpkin 
seeds, and sunflower seeds); 
• 
ochratoxin: cocoa, coffee, raisins, dried figs, cereal grains; 
• 
fumonisins: dried corn; 
• 
deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin): wheat, barley; and 
• 
patulin: apples  
 
19 FDA's Compliance Programs (Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) provide 
instructions to FDA personnel for conducting activities to evaluate industry compliance with the FD&C Act 
and other laws administered by FDA. Compliance Programs are made available to the public under the 
Freedom of Information Act. 
20 The draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 did not discuss aflatoxins in 
edible seeds. When we finalize that chapter, we intend to reference the information in our Compliance 
Program 7307.001 (Mycotoxins in Domestic and Imported Foods; Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction 
of this guidance). 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 24  
 
 
When a Table of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards broadly 
identifies the chemical hazard “mycotoxin,” a footnote in the Table also identifies the applicable 
mycotoxin.  
A1.7 Process-related Hazards and Facility-related Hazards  
As discussed in Chapter 2 of this guidance, when conducting your hazard analysis, you 
consider those known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) originating from 
processes (process-related hazards), and the food-production environment (facility-related 
hazards) (21 CFR 117.130(c)(2)). Because each facility is unique in its products, operations, 
processes, and physical plant, process-related hazards and facility-related hazards can be 
specific to each facility. Therefore, this Appendix 1 does not identify known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) process-related hazards or facility-related hazards. Instead, we 
recommend that each facility identify known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) process-
related hazards or facility-related hazards for its products based on its knowledge, experience, 
and history of hazards associated with its operations. The recommendations provided in 
Chapter 2 of this guidance and the information provided in Chapter 3 of this guidance are 
resources for facilities to do so. For your convenience, we list the most relevant biological, 
chemical, and physical hazards that are process-related or facility-related (as discussed in 
Chapter 3) in sections A1.7.1 and A1.7.2. 
For examples of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) process-related hazards and 
facility-related hazards that could be associated with certain operations, see sections A1.7.1 
through A1.7.3.  
A1.7.1 The Most Relevant Process-related and Facility-related Biological 
Hazards 
Sections 3.3.4 and 3.3.5 in Chapter 3 of this guidance provide background information for the 
following process-related and facility-related biological hazards that are most relevant to food 
safety: 
• 
Bacterial Pathogens – Presence / growth / toxin production due to survival of a lethal 
treatment. (Section 3.3.4.1) 
o For example, a heat treatment that is not properly delivered (e.g., the temperature is too 
low, or the heating time is insufficient) could allow a pathogen to survive; in some cases, 
the surviving pathogens could subsequently grow and produce toxin.  
• 
Bacterial Pathogens - Growth and/or toxin production due to poor time/temperature control. 
(Sections 3.3.4.2.1 and 3.3.4.2.2) 
o For example, a cooling mechanism that does not function as intended could allow a 
small number of microbial pathogens to increase in number. 
• 
Bacterial Pathogens - Growth and/or toxin production due to poor formulation control. 
(Section 3.3.4.2.3) 
o For example, if insufficient acid is added to reduce the pH sufficiently in an acidified 
food, pathogenic sporeformers could grow and produce toxin. 
• 
Bacterial Pathogens - Growth and/or toxin production due to reduced oxygen packaging 
(ROP). (Section 3.3.4.2.4) 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 25  
 
 
o For example, reduced oxygen packaging that is used to increase shelf life could create 
an environment that supports the growth of C. botulinum. 
• 
Bacterial pathogens - Presence due to ingredients added after process controls. (Section 
3.3.4.3) 
• 
Bacterial Pathogens – Presence, growth, or growth with toxin production due to 
recontamination due to lack of container integrity. (Section 3.3.4.4) 
o For example, if a container is not properly sealed and it is cooled in water, water 
containing pathogens can be drawn into the container.  
• 
Environmental Pathogens – Presence due to recontamination from the processing 
environment. (Section 3.3.5.1) 
o For example, equipment that is difficult to clean or is prone to damage could increase 
the risk for environmental pathogens to contaminate the product post-processing. 
o As another example, facility traffic patterns can transfer environmental pathogens from 
one process area to another. 
See also Chapters 6 through 10 of this guidance. These chapters address process controls that 
are heat treatments, time/temperature controls, formulation, drying/dehydrating, and sanitation 
controls, respectively, applicable to process-related and facility-related biological hazards that 
require a preventive control. 
A1.7.2 The Most Relevant Process-related Chemical Hazards 
Section 3.4.2 in Chapter 3 of this guidance provides background information for the following 
process-related chemical hazards that are most relevant to food safety: 
• 
Undeclared food allergens – Incorrect label (Sections 3.4.2.1.2 and 3.4.2.1.3). For example: 
o An incorrect label can result if you change the product formulation to include a food 
allergen but do not update the product label to declare that food allergen. 
o If the product label is pre-printed on the product package, an incorrect label can result if 
the wrong packaging is brought to the production line. 
o If you apply the product label to the package after the package has been filled, an 
incorrect label can result if the wrong label is brought to the production line. 
• 
Unintended food allergen presence – allergen cross-contact (Section 3.4.2.1.4). For 
example: 
o Allergen cross-contact can result if equipment that is difficult to clean or is prone to 
damage is used to produce foods that contain ingredients from different food allergen 
sources.  
o Allergen cross-contact can result from the unintentional addition of the wrong ingredient 
to a food. 
• 
Chemical hazards due to mis-formulation (e.g., sulfites, yellow #5) (Section 3.4.2.2.2) 
o For example, mis-formulation can occur if you manufacture/process some products with 
added sulfites and other products without sulfites, and if you unintentionally add sulfites 
to a product that does not include sulfites in the product recipe.  
• 
Process-contaminant hazards in certain plant-based foods (Section 3.4.2.3) 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 26  
 
 
o For example, some chemical hazards (such as acrylamide in certain plant-based foods 
and 3-monochloropropane-1,2-diol esters (3-MCPDEs) and glycidyl esters (GEs) 
(developed in some refined oils)) have the potential to form during food production, 
particularly at high temperature.21 See our website regarding 3-MCPDEs and GEs (Table 
8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) and the Codex Code of Practice CXC 
79-2019 in Table 6 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance.22  
See also Chapters 11 and 12 of this guidance; these chapters address food allergen controls 
and preventive controls for chemical hazards, respectively, applicable to process-related 
chemical hazards that require a preventive control. 
As discussed in section 3.4.3 of Chapter 3 of this guidance, this guidance does not discuss 
preventive controls for facility-related chemical hazards such as cleaning chemicals and the 
leaching of heavy metals from containers or utensils, because such hazards are usually 
addressed through CGMPs. 
A1.7.3 The Most Relevant Process-related Physical Hazards  
Section 3.5 in Chapter 3 of this guidance provides background information for the following 
process-related and facility-related physical hazards that are most relevant to food safety:  
• 
Metal (Section 3.5) 
o For example, a process that uses a metal chopping blade could introduce metal 
fragments if the blade breaks. 
• 
Glass (when product is packed in glass) (Section 3.5) 
o For example, a product packaged in glass containers could introduce glass fragments if 
a container breaks. 
• 
Hard plastic (Section 3.5) 
o For example, hard plastic can be introduced into food when tools and equipment such as 
scoops, paddles, buckets or other containers develop fatigue, crack, and break as they 
wear, or when plastic sieves and screens deteriorate. 
As discussed in section 3.5 in Chapter 3 of this guidance, in general there is overlap between 
facility-related physical hazards and process-related physical hazards and, in evaluating the 
potential for physical hazards in your food products, it does not matter whether you consider 
physical hazards to be facility-related or process-related.  
 
21 The Codex Alimentarius Commission, in which FDA participates, has developed recommendations for 
industry on reducing 3-MCPDE and GE in refined oils and foods, particularly when a refined oil is used in 
infant formula (Codex Code of Practice CXC 79-2019, Table 6 in section VI of the Introduction of this 
guidance). FDA has focused its testing efforts on infant formula because infants are a vulnerable 
population, infant formula contains relatively large amounts of oil (about 25-30%) to support infants’ 
nutritional needs, and, for some infants, infant formula is a sole food source. Because of the combined 
efforts of industry and FDA, average 3-MCPDE and GE levels in infant formula in the U.S. have declined 
over the last several years. 
22 The draft Chapter 3 that we made available for public comment in 2016 did not discuss 3-MCPDE and 
GE that can form during the production of refined oils. When we finalize that chapter, we intend to include 
information about these process-related chemical hazards. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 27  
 
 
See also Chapter 13 of this guidance, applicable to process-related and facility-related physical 
hazards that require a preventive control. 
A1.8 How to Use the Tables in Appendix 1 
A1.8.1 
Appendix 1 Reflects a Tiered Approach to the Requirements for 
Hazard Analysis  
As discussed in section A1.3, part 117 establishes a tiered approach to the requirements for 
hazard analysis. This tiered approach considers three levels of hazards:  
• 
The universe of hazards most relevant to food safety;  
• 
Known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”); and  
• 
Hazards requiring a preventive control. 
Under this tiered approach, you conduct your hazard analysis by first broadly considering the 
universe of all hazards relevant to food safety and then, through the process of hazard 
identification, narrowing that broad list of hazards to those hazards that are known or 
reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) for your food products. You then 
determine, through the process of hazard evaluation, the subset of those known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards (“potential hazards”) that are hazards requiring a preventive control. For 
additional help in determining which known or reasonably foreseeable hazards (“potential 
hazards”) require a preventive control, see Chapters 2 and 3. 
The columns in the Tables in Appendix 1 list the most relevant hazards23, among the universe 
of hazards for food safety, for 16 Food Groups. Hazards marked with an X for a Food 
Subcategory are hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards ("potential hazards") for subsequent hazard evaluation by each facility that 
produces food products in those Food Subcategories.  
A1.8.2 
Hazards that SMEs Recommended Be Identified as Known or 
Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”) Might Not Apply to All 
Food Products in a Food Subcategory  
The food products in a Food Subcategory, and the sources of food ingredients in the Food 
Subcategories, are diverse. As a result, the recommendations of SMEs in the Tables in 
Appendix 1 may not always apply to all food products in that Food Subcategory. For example, a 
hazard marked with an X could: 
• 
Be a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard only for some products in a Food 
Subcategory. For example: 
o Table 1O (Spices and Herbs) identifies Cyclospora as a known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard for some, but not all, herbs in two Food 
Subcategories (2b and 3a). 
 
23 For information on how we identified the most relevant biological and chemical hazards to address in 
this Appendix, see sections A1.5.2, A1.6.1, and A1.6.2. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 28  
 
 
o Table 1C (Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS Substances) identifies 
Salmonella as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard for 
Flavors in Subcategory 5e (Ambient or Refrigerated Other Flavor Enhancer) because 
the SMEs recommended that Salmonella be considered for one food product in this 
subcategory (i.e., hydrolyzed vegetable protein), even though other food products in this 
subcategory (such as monosodium glutamate) do not have a known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) Salmonella hazard; 
• 
Only be a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard when a food ingredient is 
sourced from a specific geographic location (e.g., for chemical hazards such as toxic 
elements and pesticides sourced from locations where there has been a history of such 
contamination); or 
• 
Only be a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard when a food ingredient is 
used in a food that changes its characteristics (e.g., B. cereus in cooked (hydrated) rice but 
not dried rice).  
See the recommendation in Chapter 2 for you to record the reasons that led to the conclusions 
of your hazard evaluation (i.e., the Yes/No conclusions listed in column 3 of Form 2-B). 
Explaining your reasons for a “No” conclusion can be just as important as explaining your 
reasons for a “Yes” conclusion. To be thorough and to have readily available answers to 
questions about your hazard analysis, you may find it useful to take a conservative approach by 
listing in Column 2 several known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazards even though 
they clearly do not require a preventive control (especially when there has been significant 
debate over whether something is actually a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) 
hazard for the facility), and explain the reasons for your “No” conclusion. This can be useful both 
during your own review of your food safety plan and during review of your food safety plan by 
others – e.g., if an inspector or auditor questions whether a particular hazard was considered.   
A1.8.3 
Each Facility Determines, Through Its Hazard Analysis, Those 
Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”) That 
Require a Preventive Control 
Each facility has the responsibility to determine, through its complete hazard analysis, whether 
known or reasonably foreseeable hazards ("potential hazards") are hazards that require a 
preventive control as appropriate to the facility and its food products. For example, a hazard 
marked with an X in the Tables could be a hazard that does not require a preventive control if it 
has a low probability of occurring in your food product in light of your facility and your food due 
to: 
• 
a process control that has exceptional lethality24 for biological pathogens (e.g., when your 
food product is caramel);   
• 
the effectiveness of your CGMP practices in addressing the hazard (such as the 
effectiveness of your CGMP hygiene procedures and policies in reducing the potential for 
sick or infected employees to contaminate food); or 
 
24 We intend to discuss processes that have “exceptional lethality” in our discussion of process validation 
(Chapter 9). For example, processes that include boiling for several minutes might be considered 
processes that provide “exceptional lethality” in that such boiling can provide a high level of reduction of 
vegetative pathogens such as E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp. and L. monocytogenes.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 29  
 
 
• 
likely preparation and handling steps before consumption (e.g., if your product is not an RTE 
food (as defined in 21 CFR 117.3) and your product label provides the end user with 
cooking instructions adequate to significantly minimize biological hazards).   
 
 
A1.9 References 
Section VII in the Introduction of this guidance includes all references cited in this guidance, 
including any references cited in this Appendix. When a reference listed in section VII of the 
Introduction of this guidance includes a website address, FDA has verified the website address, 
as of the date that the Notice of Availability for the Introduction of this guidance publishes in the 
Federal Register, but websites are subject to change over time. 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 30  
 
 
 
A1.10 Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable (“Potential”) Food-Related Biological Hazards  
 
Tables 1A through 1P list the most relevant food-related biological hazards for 16 Food Groups. The food-related biological hazards marked with 
an X for a Food Subcategory are the food-related biological hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or reasonably foreseeable 
("potential") biological hazards for subsequent hazard evaluation by each facility that produces food products in those Food Subcategories to 
determine which of these biological hazards require a preventive control as appropriate to the facility and its food products. As discussed in section 
A1.1 of this Appendix, this guidance, including Tables 1A through 1P, consistently uses a combined term (e.g., “known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) biological hazard”) to describe the output of the Tables to consistently use both the term used in the regulatory text of part 117 and a 
term that could be more familiar to some users of this guidance. 
Tables 1A through 1P do not identify any hazards requiring a preventive control in any Food Subcategory. It is the responsibility of the owner, 
operator, or agent in charge of each food facility to determine, through hazard analysis, whether a biological hazard identified in Tables 1A through 
1P as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard is a hazard requiring a preventive control in the facility’s food product.

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 31  
 
 
Table 1A: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Bakery Items 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Bread, Biscuits, 
Rolls, Brownies, 
Cookies, Pizza, 
Pie Crust 
1 
- Unbaked Bakery 
Items  
- Ready-To-Bake 
(RTB) Dough 
- RTB Crust 
- With or Without 
Inclusions1 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes bagels, 
croissants, puff pastry, 
phyllo  
Bread, 
Whole/Pre-sliced 
2a 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1 
- Without Post- 
Bake Added 
Frosting/Topping  
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes biscuits, 
bagels, rolls, croissants 
Bread, 
Whole/Pre-sliced 
2b 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1 
- With Post-Bake 
Added Filling, 
Frosting, and/or 
Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes bread with 
drizzles/ frosting 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 32  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Brownies / 
Cookies 
3a 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1 
- Without Post- 
Bake Added 
Frosting/ Topping 
 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes biscotti; fruit 
filled bars/wafers  
Brownies / 
Cookies 
3b 
- Fully-Baked 
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1  
- With Post-Bake 
Added Filling, 
Frosting, and/or 
Topping 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes fruit-, cream- 
or chocolate-filled bars/ 
wafers 
Cakes/Muffins/ 
Quick Breads 
4a 
- Fully-Baked 
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1 
- Without Post-
Bake Added 
Frosting/ Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated, or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
- Includes all flavors 
and densities  
- Includes all fillings 
added before baking  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 33  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Cakes/Muffins/ 
Quick Breads 
4b 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling or 
Inclusions1 
- With Post-Bake 
Added Filling, 
Frosting, and/or 
Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes tortes and 
products with post- 
bake added cream, 
nuts, confectionery and 
dried fruits and layer 
cakes with fillings or 
frosting 
Croutons/Bread 
Crumbs 
5 
Other Bakery 
Products 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes unseasoned 
and seasoned products 
Custard Pies 
6 
- Unbaked Bakery 
Items 
- Ready-To-Bake 
(RTB) Crust and 
Filling 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes pies with egg- 
and milk-derived 
ingredients 
Custard/Cream2/
Crème Pie/ 
Cheesecake 
7a 
- Fully-Baked/ 
Cooked  
- With or Without 
Pre-Cook Added 
Fillings  
- Without Post-
Bake Added 
Frosting/Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
X3 X3 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes cheesecake 
and pies with egg- and 
milk-derived 
ingredients 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 34  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Custard/Cream2/
Crème Pie/ 
Cheesecake 
7b 
- Fully-Baked/ 
Cooked  
- With Post-Bake 
Added Frosting/ 
Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
X3 X3 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes cheesecake 
and pies with whipped 
cream topping 
Dry Mixes 
8 
Other Bakery 
Products 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes mixes for 
breads, quick breads, 
pancakes, cookies, 
cakes, brownies, 
biscuits, breading, pie 
crust  
Fruit 
Pies/Cobblers 
9a 
Unbaked Bakery 
Items  
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes all fruits and 
fruit mixtures  
Fruit 
Pies/Cobblers 
9b 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or Without 
Pre-or Post- Bake 
Added Fillings, 
Frosting, and/or 
Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated, or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes all fruits and 
fruit mixtures  
Ice Cream 
Cones 
10 
Other Bakery 
Products 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes plain and 
sugar cones 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 35  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Liquid Batter 
11 
Unbaked Bakery 
Items 
Refrigerated 
X3 X3 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes batters for 
pancakes, brownies, 
waffles, doughnut  
Other Pastry 
Products 
12a 
- Fully-Baked  
- With or Without 
Pre-Bake Added 
Filling  
- Without Post-
Bake Added 
Frosting/Topping 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes several 
breakfast items, such 
as French toast, 
pancakes, waffles  
Other Pastry 
Products 
12b 
- Fully-Baked  
- With Post-Bake 
Added Filling, 
Frosting and/or 
Topping 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes Danishes, 
éclairs, cream puffs, 
cannoli, doughnuts, 
toaster pastries, 
turnovers  
Tortillas, Soft 
Shell/Hard Shell 
13 
Other Bakery 
Products 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X  
  
  
  
Includes tortillas made 
with corn, wheat, rice, 
quinoa 
1 If your food product includes an inclusion, your hazard analysis should also consider known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards 
associated with the inclusion (e.g., hazards for nuts, chocolate chips, fruit). The other tables in section A1.10 are resources that could be applicable to the 
inclusion.   
2 In a cream/crème pie, the crust is baked and then a cooked filling is added to the baked crust. In a custard pie, the filling is poured into the crust and then the 
filling and crust are baked at the same time.   

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 36  
 
 
3 The SMEs noted that whether these pathogenic sporeformers are known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards that could require 
time/temperature controls depends on the product (e.g., pH, water activity) and the process used to make the product.   
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 37  
 
 
Table 1B: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Beverage Items 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Non-dairy 
Cocoa/ 
Chocolate 
1a 
Ready-to-Drink 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plant-
based 
chocolate/ 
cocoa-flavored 
drinks 
Non-dairy 
Cocoa/ 
Chocolate 
1b 
Powdered 
Beverages 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plant-
based 
chocolate/ 
cocoa-flavored 
products 
Coffee 
2a 
- Roasted Beans 
- Whole or 
Ground  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
flavored, non-
flavored, and 
single serve  
Coffee 
2b 
- Ready-to-Drink 
- Unflavored and 
Flavored 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
brewed coffee 
and espresso-
style coffee  
Coffee 
2c 
- Powdered  
- Freeze Dried 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes instant 
coffees, 
cappuccino mix 
Coffee 
2d 
Concentrated 
Liquid Base 
Mixes 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plain 
and flavored 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 38  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Dairy-Based 
3 
Ready-to-Drink  
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes 
flavored and 
unflavored fluid 
milk from 
multiple 
species, yogurt 
drinks, kefir 
Non-Dairy2 
4a 
- Ready-to-Drink 
Milk Substitutes 
- Plain and 
Flavored 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes plant-
based 
beverages and 
non-dairy liquid 
creamer 
Non-Dairy 
4b 
Powdered Coffee 
Creamer   
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plain 
and flavored 
Juice-Based2 
5 
Ready-to-Drink 
(not 100% juice) 
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
All fruit drinks 
with some juice 
content 
Tea and Tea 
Substitutes 
6a 
Loose Leaf and 
Bagged  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
flavored and 
non-flavored 
teas and herbal 
teas  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 39  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Tea and Tea 
Substitutes 
6b 
- Instant  
- Powdered   
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
flavored and 
non-flavored 
teas and herbal 
teas 
Tea and Tea 
Substitutes 
6c 
Ready-to-Drink   
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
flavored and 
non-flavored 
teas and herbal 
teas 
Tea and Tea 
Substitutes 
6d 
Concentrated 
Liquid Base 
Mixes 
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plain 
and flavored 
and herbal teas  
Carbonated 
Beverages 
7 
- Ready-to-Drink 
- Carbonated  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bottled drinking 
water is subject 
to the 
processing and 
bottling 
requirements of 
21 CFR part 
129 and the 
microbiological 
criteria in 21 
CFR 165.110(b) 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 40  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Uncarbonated 
Beverages 
8 
- Ready-to-Drink  
- Uncarbonated 
Waters 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bottled drinking 
water is subject 
to the 
processing and 
bottling 
requirements of 
21 CFR part 
129 and the 
microbiological 
criteria in 21 
CFR 165.110(b) 
Sports and 
Energy 
Beverages 
9 
Ready-to-Drink  
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X3 
 
 
 
 
All varieties 
Beverage 
Concentrates/
Base Mixes2 
10a 
  Liquid 
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes bases 
for carbonated 
beverages and 
syrups for 
flavored drinks  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 41  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Beverage 
Concentrates/
Base Mixes 
10b 
Dry Powdered 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
powdered 
flavors  
Adult 
Beverage 
Mixers2 
11 
Mixes intended 
for alcoholic 
beverages (liquid 
and powders) 
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
All varieties 
Ground 
Coffee 
Substitutes 
12 
 Dry Powdered 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X4 
X4 
 
 
 
 
Includes chicory 
root powder, 
roasted grains 
1 The SMEs noted that whether these pathogenic sporeformers are known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards that could require 
time/temperature controls depends on the product (e.g., pH, water activity) and the process used to make the product. 
2 Depending on the ingredients there could be other hazards. Refer to other tables for the ingredients. 
3 There may not be any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable to shelf-stable products. Shelf-stable products that are LACF 
products are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 117. Shelf-stable non-LACF products generally are produced using an 
exceptionally lethal process. (See the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.)  
4 The SMEs identified this as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable only when the beverage includes an herb. 
5 See Table 1J for the known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated with the applicable roasted grain.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 42  
 
 
Table 1C: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Miscellaneous Food Additives, 
Color Additives, and GRAS Substances 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Emulsifiers 
1 
Emulsifiers 
 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X3 
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as lecithin (from 
soy, safflower, or 
corn oil or from egg) 
mono- and 
diglycerides, 
polysorbates, 
sorbitan 
monostearate 
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2a Firming Agents 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as calcium 
chloride, calcium 
lactate 
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2b Humectants 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as glycerin, 
sorbitol 
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2c Leavening 
Agents 
 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 X3 
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as baking soda, 
monocalcium 
phosphate, calcium 
carbonate, dried 
yeast 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 43 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes
S. aureus
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2d 
Stabilizers, 
Thickeners, 
Binders, 
Texturizers 
Ambient 
X 
Includes substances 
such as gelatin, 
pectin, carrageenan, 
modified starches, 
acacia gum, guar 
gum, xanthan gum  
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2e 
Dough 
Strengtheners 
and 
Conditioner 
Ambient 
Includes substances 
such as ammonium 
sulfate, 
azodicarbonamide, 
and l-cysteine 
Stabilizers and 
Thickeners 
2f 
Anti-caking 
Agents 
Ambient 
Includes substances 
such as calcium 
silicate, iron 
ammonium citrate, 
silicon dioxide 
Enzymes 
3 
Bakery, 
Proteolytic, 
Starch/Sugar 
Liquefication,
Cheese-
making 
Refrigerated 
X 
Includes substances 
such as amylases, 
chymosin, lactase, 
lipase, papain, 
proteases, xylanase  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 44  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Colors 
4a Certified Colors 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes FD&C 
colors listed in 21 
CFR part 74, subpart 
A 
Colors 
4b 
Colors Exempt 
from 
Certification 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes colors listed 
in 21 CFR part 73, 
subpart A  
Flavors 
5a Liquid: Oil-
Based1, 2 
 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes a variety of 
oil-based flavor 
extracts from plants 
Flavors 
5b Liquid: 
Aqueous 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes a variety of 
non-oil-based flavor 
extracts from plants  
Flavors 
5c Powdered: 
Natural Flavor 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
Includes a variety of 
powdered flavor 
extracts from plants  
Flavors 
5d 
Artificial: 
Synthetic 
Flavor 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
Includes a variety of 
synthetic flavors  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 45  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Flavors 
5e Other: Flavor 
Enhancer 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as monosodium 
glutamate, autolyzed 
yeast extract, 
hydrolyzed vegetable 
proteins, disodium 
guanylate, inosinate 
Flavors 
5f 
Flavor Paste 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes a variety of 
plant-based flavor 
pastes  
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6a Processing 
Chemicals 
 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as potassium 
hydroxide, potassium 
bicarbonate, sodium 
chloride, hydrochloric 
acid, sodium 
hydroxide, calcium 
carbonate, calcium 
lactate, mineral oil 
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6b Organic Acids 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as acetic acid, 
citric acid, lactic acid, 
fumaric acid 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 46  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6c Antioxidants 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as butylated 
hydroxy toluene 
(BHT), d-alpha-
tocopherol acetate 
(TOCO) 
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6d 
Antimicrobials 
and 
Preservatives 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes substances 
such as nisin, 
potassium sorbate 
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6e Processing Aid 
Gases 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes gases such 
as nitrogen, carbon 
dioxide 
Other Chemical 
Ingredients 
6f 
Soluble Fiber 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes substances 
such as inulin, 
fructan 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 47  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
 Nutrients 
7 
Vitamins, 
Minerals, and 
Vitamin/Mineral 
Premixes 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes substances 
such as thiamine 
hydrochloride, 
riboflavin, niacin, 
niacinamide, folate or 
folic acid, beta 
carotene, potassium 
iodide, iron or ferrous 
sulfate, alpha 
tocopherols, ascorbic 
acid, Vitamin D, 
magnesium sulfate 
1 Although the SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards in the source plant of some of these oils (e.g., 
sesame, almond), such hazards have not been found in the oils.   
2 See also Category 3b (Essential oils) in Table 1O (Spices and Herbs). 
3 Salmonella has been isolated from soy lecithin (Food Navigator.co, 2006; and The Brussels Times, 2022a and b) and dried yeast (Wilson et al., 
1975). 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 48  
 
 
Table 1D: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Chocolate and Candy 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Chocolate 
Industrial 
Products 
1a 
Raw Cocoa 
Beans 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Cocoa Beans 
Chocolate 
Industrial 
Products 
1b 
Roasted Cocoa 
Beans and Nibs 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Beans and Nibs 
Chocolate 
Industrial 
Products 
1c 
Chocolate/Cocoa 
Products for 
Baking  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes chocolate products 
with varying sweetness and 
includes bulk solid (blocks), 
bulk molded (chips),  
bulk powder, and bulk liquid 
Confectionary 
Industrial 
Products 
2a 
Other Products 
for Baking  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes bulk molded (e.g., 
peanut butter chips, caramel 
chip) and bulk liquid 
Confectionary 
Industrial 
Products 
2b 
Chocolate 
Coating for 
Enrobing  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes bulk solid and bulk 
liquid products  
Chocolate and 
Confectionery 
Products 
3a 
Chocolate 
Confections 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
  
 
  
  
Includes bars, chips, morsels, 
fudge, bonbons 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 49  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Chocolate and 
Confectionery 
Products  
3b 
Chocolate 
Confections - 
With Inclusions1 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
Includes chocolate covered 
nuts/ fruit/ caramel/ mints, 
biscuits, nougats; chocolate 
candy bar with nuts or fruit; 
chocolate with crisped rice; 
fudge with nuts  
Confectionery 
Products  
3c 
Sugar 
Confections2 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
Includes caramels, gummy gel 
candies, fruit chews, licorice, 
marshmallows, soft jellied 
candy, gel cups candy, maple 
creams, fondant, pastilles, rock 
candy, hard candy 
Confectionery 
Products  
3d 
Sugar 
Confections with 
inclusions1 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
Includes nut brittles (peanut 
brittle, almond brittle), nut 
clusters, candy with fruit pieces 
Confectionery 
Products  
3e 
Sugar 
Confections 
Specialties  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
 
 
  
  
Includes candy coated 
popcorn, cereal confection, 
marzipan, coconut roll, peanut 
butter fudge, cotton candy2, 
pastes 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 50  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Toppings/ 
Frosting 
4 
Toppings and 
Frosting (Non- 
Fruit/Nut) 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X3 
  
 
  
  
All flavors and varieties 
1 With the exception of inclusions (e.g., nuts, chocolate chips, fruit) added after the cooking process for the chocolate confection is complete, the SMEs did not 
identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for products found in this Food Subcategory because the products are processed 
by an “exceptionally lethal process.” (See the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.) If your food product includes an inclusion added 
after the cooking process for the chocolate confection, your hazard analysis should also consider known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological 
hazards associated with the inclusion (e.g., hazards for nuts, chocolate chips, fruit).  The other tables in section A1.10 are resources that could be applicable to 
the inclusion. 
2 The SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for products found in this Food Subcategory or identified in the 
comment box because the products are processed by an “exceptionally lethal process.” (See the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.) 
3 The SMEs identified a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) Salmonella hazard only if the product contains ingredients for which Salmonella is a 
known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard. See the applicable Table for any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazards associated with 
the ingredients of your food product. 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 51  
 
 
Table 1E: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Dairy 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Raw1 Milk 
1 
Liquid Milk for 
Processing 
Refrigerated 
X2 X2 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Raw fluid milk 
Milk and Butter 
2a 
Liquid Milk 
products 
Ambient3 or 
Refrigerated 
X2 X2  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes flavored and 
unflavored fluid milk 
from multiple species 
(cow, goat, sheep), 
ultra-pasteurized 
milks, milk-based 
creamer  
Milk and Butter 
2b 
Cream products 
Refrigerated 
X2 X2  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes heavy, light, 
whipping creams and 
half-and-half 
Milk and Butter 
2c 
Butter products 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Includes butter 
spreads and blends 
Milk and Butter 
2d 
Cultured milk 
products 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes buttermilk, 
sour cream, yogurt, 
yogurt drinks, kefir 
Milk and Butter 
2e 
 Dry milk 
products4 
Ambient 
X5 
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
 
  
  
Includes dried 
products extracted 
from milk, such as 
whey powder and 
dried milk products 
used in dried dips 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 52  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Milk-Based 
Products  
3a 
Ice cream, 
regular and low 
fat (with and 
without 
inclusions)6 
Frozen 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
All flavors 
Milk-Based 
Products 
3b 
Sherbets 
Frozen 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
All flavors  
Milk-Based 
Products 
3c 
Frozen Novelty 
Items 
Frozen 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes ice cream 
cakes/bars/ 
sandwiches, frozen 
yogurt 
Cheese and 
Cheese Products – 
Whole 
4a 
Extra Hard 
Cheese (low pH, 
low water activity)   
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Parmesan, 
Asiago, Romano, 
Sbrinz 
Cheese and 
Cheese Products – 
Whole 
4b 
Hard Cheese  
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Cheddar, 
Colby, Swiss, Gruyere 
Cheese and 
Cheese Products – 
Whole 
4c 
Semi-soft Cheese 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Monterey, 
Provolone, Oaxaca, 
Monterey Jack, Edam, 
Havarti, Paneer, 
Raclette 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 53  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Cheese and 
Cheese Products – 
Whole 
4d 
Soft, Ripened 
Cheese 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Brie, 
Camembert, Taleggio  
Cheese and 
Cheese Products – 
Whole 
4e 
Soft, Unripen 
Cheese/ Fresh 
Cheese 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Cottage 
Cheese, Cream 
Cheese, Ricotta, 
Queso Fresco, 
Cheese Curd, 
Mozzarella 
 Cheese and 
Cheese Products - 
Sliced, Shredded, 
or Grated 
5a 
Hard and Extra 
Hard Cheese  
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Parmesan, 
Asiago, Romano, 
Cheddar 
Cheese and 
Cheese Products - 
Sliced, Shredded, 
or Grated 
5b 
Semi-soft Cheese 
Refrigerated 
  
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes Monterey, 
Provolone, Oaxaca, 
Monterey Jack  
Cheese and 
Cheese Products - 
Sliced, Shredded, 
or Grated 
5c 
Pasteurized 
Process Cheese 
Ambient7 or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes Process 
American Cheese 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 54  
 
 
1 Milk and cream, and butter made from them, in this Table are considered “pasteurized” under 21 CFR 1240.61 and the Pasteurized Milk Ordinance. Raw milk is 
only used in certain cheeses that are aged for at least 60 days. Brucella spp. and Campylobacter spp. are not identified as known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) hazards for Food Categories other than Raw Milk because processes targeting the principal pathogens associated with dairy products will also 
address these pathogens and they generally are not reintroduced into milk after it has been pasteurized. 
2 The SMEs noted that whether these pathogenic sporeformers are known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards that could require 
time/temperature controls depends on the product (e.g., pH, water activity) and the process used to make the product. 
3 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) products (including evaporated and sweetened and condensed milk products), which are not subject to the requirements for 
biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 117.  
4 We recommend that you also consider Cronobacter spp. (including C. sakazakii) as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard when milk 
powders are destined for use in dry blended powdered infant formula products. A facility that manufactures/processes powdered infant formula is subject to 
the microbiological criteria in 21 CFR 106.55(e) for when a powdered infant formula that contains Cronobacter spp. will be deemed adulterated under sections 
402(a)(1), 402(a)(4), and 412(a)(3) of the FD&C Act. 
5 The SMEs identified this as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable only when the food is used as an ingredient in another 
product where the dried milk becomes hydrated.  
6 If your food product includes an inclusion, your hazard analysis should also consider known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards 
associated with the inclusion (e.g., hazards for nuts, chocolate chips, fruit). The other tables in section A1.10 are resources that could be applicable to the 
inclusion.   
7 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) pasteurized process cheese products (e.g., jars of cheese spreads), which are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards 
in 21 CFR Part 117. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 55  
 
 
Table 1F: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Dressings, Condiments, and Dips 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Condiments  
1a Mayonnaise 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
 
  
  
Includes regular and 
“lite” products and 
flavored products  
Condiments  
1b Mustard 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes all varieties  
Condiments  
1c Ketchup 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
Condiments  
1d Vinegar 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties  
Condiments  
1e Other 
Condiments 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
Includes soy sauce, 
Worcestershire sauce, 
prepared horseradish, 
steak sauce, Tabasco 
sauce 
Salad 
Dressings  
2a 
Dressings, 
salad 
(prepared) 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
X  
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes all varieties  
Salad 
Dressings  
2b Dry mixes 
Ambient 
 
 
 
  
  
X 
X 
  
 
  
  
Includes all varieties  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 56  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Dips 
3a Dips and 
spreads 
Ambient1 or 
Refrigerated 
X 
X 
  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
Includes dips and 
spreads such as  
guacamole, salsa, 
dairy-based dips, 
bean dips, sesame-
based dips (e.g., 
hummus, tahini, 
vegetable dips, taco 
Dip, 7-layer dip 
Dips 
3b Dips and 
spreads, dry 
Ambient 
X2 
X2 
 
  
  
X 
X 
  
X 
 
  
Dry dips, dry dairy-
based dips (e.g., 
vegetable dip 
seasoning, toasted 
onion dip mix) 
1 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) products which are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 117.  
2 The SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential) biological hazards for sporeformers that would apply only when these products are 
rehydrated and/or used as an ingredient in a product where pH would permit growth. 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 57  
 
 
Table 1G: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Egg and Egg Products 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Shell Eggs 
1 
 Shell Eggs  
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
 
  
  
  
Includes raw and 
pasteurized in-
shell   
Further 
Processed Egg 
Products  
2a 
Eggs Hard 
Cooked  
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes eggs in 
shell or shelled 
Further 
Processed Egg 
Products  
2b 
Cooked Egg 
Products  
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
  
  
  
 
X 
X 
 
  
  
Includes cooked 
products such as 
omelets, egg 
patties, scrambled 
eggs 
Further 
Processed Egg 
Products  
3 
Egg-based 
products and egg 
substitutes (not 
fully cooked)1 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
For use as an 
ingredient 
1 As discussed in section A1.6.1.4, the production of certain processed egg products (e.g., pasteurized liquid whole egg) is subject to regulation by USDA’s FSIS 
under the Egg Products Inspection Act. However, these processed egg products could be used as ingredients in foods subject to FDA’s jurisdiction. 
    

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 58  
 
 
Table 1H: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Fruits and Vegetables 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Fruits 
1 
Whole RAC 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X1 
X2 
All whole RAC 
fruits  
Processed 
Fruits 
2a Fresh-cut 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X1 
X2 
All fresh-cut fruit, 
including 
individual fruit 
and mixed fruit 
Processed 
Fruits 
2b Whole or Cut 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X1 
X2 
All frozen fruit 
Processed 
Fruits 
2c Heat Treated 
Fruit Products 
Ambient3,4 or 
Refrigerated    
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes 
individual and 
mixed fruit (e.g., 
fruit and mixed 
fruit in juice or 
syrup) 
Processed 
Fruits 
2d 
Dried/ 
Dehydrated Fruit 
Products 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All dried/ 
dehydrated fruits 
Processed 
Fruits 
2e Jams, Jellies, 
Chutneys4 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All varieties 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 59  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Processed 
Fruits 
2f 
Coated Fruits5 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
All coated fruits 
(e.g., caramel 
apples with 
inserted stick, 
chocolate 
covered 
strawberries) 
Vegetables 
3 
Whole RAC 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
X6 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X7 
 
All whole RAC 
vegetables 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4a Fresh-cut 
Refrigerated 
X6 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All fresh-cut 
vegetables 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4b Whole or Cut 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All frozen 
vegetables 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4c Whole or cut, 
Heat treated 
Refrigerated 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All heat-treated, 
refrigerated 
vegetables, such 
as mashed 
potatoes and 
roasted 
vegetables 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4d Acidified 
Products 
Ambient 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All ambient 
acidified 
vegetables and 
vegetable 
mixtures (such 
as in salsas) 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 60  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4e 
Dried/ 
Dehydrated 
Products 
Ambient 
X8 
X8 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All dried/ 
dehydrated 
vegetables 
Processed 
Vegetables 
4f 
Fermented 
Products 
Ambient 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes 
sauerkraut, 
pickles, kimchi 
Processed 
Fruits or 
Vegetables 
5 
Acid Pureed 
Products 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes 
applesauce, 
apple butter, 
tomato paste 
1 The SME identification of the parasite Cyclospora as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard in this subcategory primarily applies to 
berries and berry-containing products that have not been heat treated sufficiently to inactivate Cyclospora, but could also apply to other produce from areas 
where Cyclospora has been determined to be present, e.g., in the water supply. 
2 The SME identification of viruses (such as norovirus and hepatitis A) as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards is limited to berries, 
pomegranates (the arils), and any fresh, refrigerated, or frozen products containing berries or pomegranate. 
3 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) products such as heat-treated canned mangoes, which are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 
117. 
4 The SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for shelf-stable products found in this Food Subcategory 
because the products are processed by an “exceptionally lethal process.” (See the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.) 
5 Your hazard analysis should also consider known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards associated with the coating (e.g., hazards for 
chocolate) and the specific fruits being coated. The other tables in section A1.10 are resources that could be applicable to the coating.   
6 See the discussion, in Chapter 3 of this guidance, of the potential for reduced oxygen packaging (ROP) to create a process-related biological hazard. When we 
finalize Chapter 3, we intend to emphasize that this risk may not apply to all fresh and fresh-cut produce RACs (e.g., we are not aware of reports of botulism 
associated with commercially available fresh-cut leafy greens packaged in ROP). We also intend to emphasize the importance of evaluating whether ROP 
presents an increased risk from sporeforming pathogens in your specific food product when deciding whether to use ROP.   

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 61  
 
 
7    The SME identification of parasites (such as Cyclospora) as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard in this subcategory primarily 
applies to fresh herbs (such as basil and cilantro) and uncooked foods containing these herbs, but could also apply to other produce from areas where 
Cyclospora has been determined to be present, e.g., in the water supply. 
8 The SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards only when the food is used as an ingredient in another product where the 
dehydrated vegetable becomes hydrated.  
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 62  
 
 
 
Table 1I: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Game Meat Products1 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Raw Game 
Meat 
1a 
Intact (Not 
Ground) Game 
Meat 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
  
  
 X 
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
 X2 
 
Intact meat from 
all game species 
(e.g., bison, 
deer, elk, rabbit, 
and birds (such 
as pheasant, 
grouse, quail))  
Raw Game 
Meat 
1b Ground Game 
Meat 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
  
  
 X 
  
X 
X 
X 
 X 
  
 X2 
 
Ground meat 
from all game 
species  
Game Meat 
Products 
2a 
Processed 
Game Meat 
Products 
Ambient 
  
  
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
 X 
 
  
 
Processed 
products such 
as jerky  
Game Meat 
Products 
2b 
Processed 
Game Meat 
Products 
Refrigerated 
  
  
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
  
 
Processed 
products such 
as sausages, 
patties, 
frankfurters, 
salami 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 63  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Game Meat 
Products 
2c 
Processed 
Game Meat 
Products 
Frozen 
  
  
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
  
 
Processed 
products such 
as sausages, 
patties, 
frankfurters, 
salami  
1 The SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards in the broad category “Game Meat Products” but did not 
differentiate between species (e.g., bison, deer, rabbit).  
2 Toxoplasma gondii is associated with deer and elk.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 64  
 
 
Table 1J: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and 
Starches   
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Grains  
1 
Whole, grains 
Ambient 
X1 
 X1 
  
  
  
X 
X 
 X 
  
  
  
All whole grains  
Grains, Milled 
Products 
2a 
Flours (other 
than rice flour, 
corn flour, and 
root flour) 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All flours from grains 
(except as noted in the 
subcategory); includes 
gluten 
Grains, Milled 
Products 
2b 
Rice and rice 
products 
Ambient 
X1 
 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes all varieties of 
rice and rice-based 
noodles 
Grains, Milled 
Products 
2c 
Malt 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes all malted grain 
products 
Grains, Milled 
Products 
2d 
Corn 
Ambient 
X1 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Cornmeal, corn flour 
Grain-based 
Cereal 
Products 
3a 
Cereal 
Product: 
Ready-to-Eat 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes cereal products 
with and without 
inclusions2  
Grain-based 
Cereal 
Products 
3b 
Breakfast 
food, dried 
Ambient 
X1 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes products such as 
oatmeal, farina, oat bran, 
cream of wheat, grits 
Grain-based 
Pasta 
Products 
4a 
Unfilled Pasta 
Refrigerated 
or Frozen 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All varieties  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 65  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Grain-based 
Pasta 
Products 
4b 
Filled Par-
boiled Pasta 
Refrigerated 
or Frozen 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
All varieties  
Grain-based 
Pasta 
Products 
4c 
Dried Pasta 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
All varieties 
Other Milled 
Products 
5a 
Root flours 
Ambient 
X1 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
All root flours (e.g., from 
potatoes, cassava) 
Other Milled 
Products 
5b 
Starch 
products 
Ambient 
X1 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Cornstarch, Potato 
Starch, Wheat Starch 
Pulses3 
6a 
Whole, dried 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes all pulses  
 Pulses3 
6b 
Cooked 
pulses 
Ambient,4 
Refrigerated 
or Frozen 
X 
X 
X 
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes bean paste 
1 The SMEs identified this as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable only when the food becomes hydrated to an aw that 
allows growth or is used as an ingredient in another product where the grains/pulse/flour/starch become hydrated to an aw that allows growth.  
2 If a cereal product contains one or more inclusions (such as nuts or chocolate), your hazard analysis should also consider known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) biological hazards associated with the inclusion (e.g., hazards for nuts, chocolate chips, fruit).  The other tables in section A1.10 are resources that 
could be applicable to the inclusion.  
3 Pulses are the dried, edible, pod-grown seed from produce (such as peas, beans, or lentils) within the legume family. Pulses include commodities such as 
bambara beans; chickpeas; cowpeas; dry beans (such as adzuki, black, flageolet, great northern, kidney, lima, mung, navy, pink, pinto, and tepary beans); dry 
broad beans; dry peas; lentils; and pigeon peas. 
4 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) products such as canned pulses or bean pastes, which are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 117. 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 66  
 
 
  
Table 1K: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Nuts and Seeds 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Nuts  
1a 
Peanuts, Raw 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X  
X 
 X 
  
  
  
Peanuts  
Nuts  
1b 
Peanuts Roasted 
or Boiled 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X  
X 
 X 
  
  
  
Peanuts  
Nuts  
1c 
Tree Nuts, Raw 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
 X 
  
  
  
Includes all tree nuts 
Nuts  
1d 
Tree Nuts, 
Roasted 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
 X 
  
  
  
Includes all tree nuts 
Nuts 
1e 
Nut Butters 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Includes product from 
peanuts and tree nuts   
Edible Seeds 
2a 
Raw 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes edible seeds 
from flax, melon, 
pumpkin, sesame, 
sunflower 
Edible Seeds 
2b 
Roasted 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes edible seeds 
from flax, melon, 
pumpkin,  
sesame, sunflower 
Other Nut and 
Seed Products 
3a 
Nut and Seed 
Pastes 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X  
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes pastes from 
peanuts, tree nuts, and 
seeds, seeds  
Other Nut and 
Seed Products 
3b 
Nut and Seed 
Flours 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes flour from 
peanuts, tree nuts, and 
seeds  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 67  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Other Nut and 
Seed Products 
3c 
Coconut Products 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated, 
or Frozen 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes shredded, 
flaked, and toasted 
products 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 68 
Table 1L: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Oils and Oil Products 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes
S. aureus
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Oil Products 
1a 
Cooking Oils 
Ambient 
Includes single oils and oil 
blends 
Oil Products 
1b 
Margarines and 
other spreads 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
Includes all varieties 
Oil Products 
1c 
Shortening 
Ambient 
Includes varieties 
considered as imitation/ 
substitute and includes 
partially and fully 
hydrogenated vegetable 
oils 
Oil Products 
1d 
Infused Oils 
Ambient 
X1 
Includes oils infused with 
acidified or non-acidified 
ingredients 
Oil Products 
1e 
Cocoa Butter 
and Cocoa 
Butter 
Substitutes 
Ambient 
Includes cocoa butter and 
cocoa butter substitutes 
(e.g., from coconut oil, 
palm kernel oil, or both 
oils (21 CFR 172.861) or 
primarily from palm oil or 
primarily from high-oleic 
safflower or sunflower oil 
(21 CFR 184.1259) 
1 The SMEs only identified C. botulinum as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazard for oils infused with an ingredient that has not been acidified. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 69  
 
 
Table 1M: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Snack Foods1 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Bread Snacks 
1a 
Baked or Fried  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes 
unseasoned and 
seasoned2 
varieties  
Bread Snacks 
1b 
Baked with Filling  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes 
unseasoned and 
seasoned2 
varieties 
Chips and 
Crisps 
2a 
Fried Fruit/ 
Vegetable 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
 X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes 
unseasoned3 and 
seasoned2 
varieties  
Chips and 
Crisps 
2b 
Baked Fruit/ 
Vegetable 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
 X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes 
unseasoned3 and 
seasoned2 
varieties  
Chips and 
Crisps 
2c 
Dehydrated Fruit/ 
Vegetable 
 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
unseasoned3 and 
seasoned2 
varieties 
Crackers and 
Biscuits 
3a 
- Baked  
- Unfilled 
Ambient3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
unseasoned and 
seasoned2 
varieties  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 70  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Crackers and 
Biscuits 
3b 
- Baked  
- Filled4  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
unseasoned and 
seasoned2 
varieties 
Puffed Snacks 
4 
Baked or Fried  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes 
unseasoned3 and 
seasoned2 
varieties  
Snack Food 
Bars 
5 
- Cold Pressed/ 
Formed  
- With or without 
coating 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
  
Includes bars 
made with nuts, 
fruit, seeds, 
chocolate chips4  
Snack Mix 
6 
Mixed/ Coated 
Fruits, Nuts, and 
Pretzels  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
X  
X 
  
 
  
  
Includes all 
varieties and 
coatings4 
Pudding and 
Gelatin 
Products 
7a 
 Dry Mixes 
Ambient 
 
 
  
  
  
X 
X 
 
  
  
  
Includes all 
varieties4 
Pudding and 
Gelatin 
Products 
7b 
Prepared 
Ambient5 or 
Refrigerated 
X 
X 
  
  
  
X 
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes all 
varieties4 
Frozen 
Novelties 
8a 
Non-Dairy  
Frozen 
  
  
  
  
  
  
X 
X 
  
  
  
Includes all 
varieties and 
coatings4 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 71  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Frozen 
Novelties 
8b 
Flavored Ices 
Frozen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes all 
varieties and 
flavors 
1 See other Food Groups such as Bakery, Confectionary, Dairy, Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches, and Nuts and Seeds for additional Snack Categories such as 
cookies, candy, ice cream dairy novelties, mixed nuts, sunflower seeds, and instant noodles. 
2 If the product is seasoned after baking or frying, see also Table 1O for known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) hazards in spices and herbs that could be 
used in the seasoning. 
3 The SMEs did not identify any known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for shelf-stable products found in this Food Subcategory 
because the products are processed by an “exceptionally lethal process.” (See the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.) 
4 If the product contains ingredients addressed by other Tables, see the applicable Table as well. 
5 Excludes LACF (shelf-stable) products, which are not subject to the requirements for biological hazards in 21 CFR Part 117.

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 72  
 
 
. 
Table 1N: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Soups and Sauces 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Soups, 
Sauces, 
Gravies 
1a 
Dry Mixes, 
Powders 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
X2  
X2 
 X2 
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
Soups, 
Sauces, 
Gravies 
1b 
Base pastes 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
X2  
X2 
X2  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
Soups, 
Sauces, 
Gravies 
1c 
Full Strength 
Liquid or 
Condensed 
Refrigerated 
or Frozen 
X 
X  
X 
  
  
X2  
X2 
X2 
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
1 The SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards for sporeformers that would apply only when these products 
are rehydrated and/or used as an ingredient in a high-moisture food.   
2  In some cases, for vegetative cells of pathogens the cooking step for a product in this Food Subcategory is an exceptionally lethal process. (See 
the discussion of exceptionally lethal processes in section A1.6.1.3.) Because some products in this Food Subcategory are produced using 
processing that is not an exceptionally lethal process, the SMEs recommended that the vegetative pathogen hazards marked with an X be identified 
as known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards. If the processing step is an exceptionally lethal process, the outcome of the 
hazard analysis could be that the listed known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard does not require a preventive control. Check 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 73  
 
 
other tables for the major ingredients, because, depending on the ingredients, there may be other hazards, and some of the hazards listed here 
may not apply to all products in a Food Subcategory.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 74  
 
 
Table 1O: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Spices and Herbs 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
  Spices  
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or 
Whole 
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
 
X2 
  
  
  
  
Includes cinnamon, 
cardamom, turmeric, 
paprika, pepper (black, 
white, red), cayenne 
powder, paprika, chili 
powder, cumin, coriander, 
mustard, fenugreek, 
horseradish, fennel seeds, 
caraway, allspice, nutmeg, 
ginger, garlic (minced or 
powder), onion (minced or 
powder), oregano, celery 
seed  
Herbs   
2a 
Dried  
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
 
X2 
  
  
  
  
Includes basil, oregano, 
thyme, sage, parsley, bay 
leaf, dill, rosemary, 
cilantro, mint, kaffir lime, 
chives, peppermint 
Herbs 
2b 
Fresh 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X2 
 
 
X3 
 
Includes basil, oregano, 
thyme, sage, parsley, bay 
leaf, dill, rosemary, 
cilantro, mint, kaffir lime, 
chives, peppermint 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 75  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Seasonings  
3a 
Pastes 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
 
X2 
  
  
X3 
  
Includes varieties made 
from a single spice or herb 
or from multiple spices or 
herbs  
Seasonings  
3b 
Essential Oils 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes essential oil 
extracted from any spice or 
herb 
Seasonings  
3c 
Spice and 
seasoning 
mixtures, Dry 
or Liquid 
Blends  
Ambient 
X1 
X1 
X1 
  
  
 
X2 
  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
Seasonings 
4 
Salt 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes all varieties 
1 The SMEs identified this as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable only when these products are rehydrated 
and/or used as an ingredient in a high-moisture food. 
2 The SMEs identified Salmonella spp., but not pathogenic E. coli, as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard in this 
subcategory based on a 2022 FAO/WHO report (FAO/WHO 2022b). 
3 The SME identification of the parasite Cyclospora as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard in this subcategory 
primarily applies only to certain herbs (e.g., basil and cilantro), but could also apply to other herbs from areas where Cyclospora has been 
determined to be present, e.g., in the water supply. 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 76  
 
 
Table 1P: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Food Sweeteners (Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1a Sugars (Dry) 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties  
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1b Syrup/Molasses 
(Liquid) 
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties  
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1c Honey (Liquid) 
Ambient 
  
X1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes all varieties 
and forms (e.g., 
comb, strained, 
whipped) 
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1d 
Imitation 
Syrup/Molasses 
(Liquid) 
Ambient 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes all flavors/ 
varieties   
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1e  Sugar Substitutes 
(Nutritive)  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes sugar 
alcohols, isomalt, 
tagatose  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 77  
 
 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Bacillus cereus 
Clostridium botulinum 
C. perfringens 
Brucella spp. 
Campylobacter spp. 
Pathogenic E. coli 
Salmonella spp. 
L. monocytogenes 
S. aureus 
Parasites 
Viruses 
Comments 
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1f 
Sugar Substitutes 
(Non-nutritive)  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Includes aspartame, 
saccharin, 
acesulfame K, 
neotame, stevia, 
sucralose 
1 The SMEs identified this as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazard applicable only if honey is used as an ingredient in 
infant foods. 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 78  
 
 
A1.11 Tables of Potential Food-Related Chemical Hazards  
For consistency with the Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable (“Potential”) Food-Related Biological Hazards (Tables 1A through 1P), we 
organized this section around the same 16 Food Groups as those addressed by Tables 1A through 1P. However, in most circumstances a 
chemical hazard requiring a preventive control is addressed through a supply-chain program on ingredients used in a food product rather than 
through process controls applied during production of the food product. Therefore, we focused the Tables in this section on the food categories and 
subcategories containing food products that could be consumed as an ingredient of other food products; in some cases (e.g., Fruits and 
Vegetables) these food products also might be consumed as a finished food product. For example, for the purpose of considering biological 
hazards, Table 1G (Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related biological hazards for Egg and Egg Products) lists 5 food categories, 
including shell eggs. However, for the purpose of considering chemical hazards Table 2G (Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-
related chemical hazards for Egg and Egg Products) lists only one of those 5 food categories – i.e., shell eggs; shell eggs would be the source 
ingredient of the remaining 4 food categories that are listed in Table 1G for food-related biological hazards.  
For 12 of the 16 Food Groups, Tables 2B, 2D, 2E, 2G, 2H, 2I, 2J, 2K, 2O, and 2P list the most relevant food-related chemical hazards and mark 
with an X for a Food Subcategory the most relevant food-related chemical hazards that SMEs recommended be identified as known or reasonably 
foreseeable hazards ("potential hazards") for subsequent hazard evaluation by each facility that produces food products in those Food 
Subcategories to determine which hazards require a preventive control as appropriate to the facility and its food products. As discussed in section 
A1.1 of this Appendix, this guidance, including the Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable (“Potential”) Food-Related Chemical Hazards, 
consistently uses the combined term “known or reasonably foreseeable hazard (“potential hazard”)” to describe the output of the Tables to 
consistently use both the term used in the regulatory text of part 117 and a term that could be more familiar to some users of this guidance. 
For four of the 16 Food Groups (i.e., Bakery Items; Dressings, Condiments, and Dips; Snack Foods; and Soups and Sauces) the chemical hazards 
depend on the ingredients used. To maintain the overall organization associated with the 16 Food Groups, for these Food Groups we include an 
entry for that “Food Group” (i.e., Food Groups 2A, 2F, 2M, and 2N) and advise you to address known or reasonably foreseeable chemical 
hazards (“potential chemical hazards”) that might be in the ingredients you use to produce foods in that Food Group. 
For three Food Groups (i.e., Tables 2H, 2L, and 2O for Fruits and Vegetables, Oils and Oil Products, and Spices and Herbs, respectively), we 
organized the information in the Table around the hazards rather than around the food categories and food subcategories. For example, Table 2H 
for Fruits and Vegetables has separate rows directed to pesticides, cadmium, lead, and mycotoxins/other natural toxins. We organized the 
information this way because some chemical hazards (such as pesticides in the Fruits and Vegetables Food Group) broadly apply to many foods in 
a Food Group, whereas other chemical hazards (such as toxic elements and mycotoxins) more narrowly apply to a subset of foods in a Food 
Group.  
The Tables of Known or Reasonably Foreseeable (“Potential”) Food-Related Chemical Hazards do not identify any hazards requiring a preventive 
control in any Food Subcategory. It is the responsibility of the owner, operator, or agent in charge of each food facility to determine, through hazard 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 79  
 
 
analysis, whether a chemical hazard identified in these Tables as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazard is a hazard 
requiring a preventive control for the facility’s food product. 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 80  
 
 
Food Group 2A: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Bakery Items 
This Appendix does not include a Table of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Bakery Items. Instead, 
for known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Bakery Items, you should see the Table(s) associated with the 
ingredients in your Bakery Item. For example:  
• 
If your Bakery Item contains chocolate, you should consult Table 2D regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Chocolate and Candy. 
• 
If your Bakery Item contains eggs, you should consult Table 2G regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Egg and Egg Products. 
• 
If your Bakery Item contains wheat flour, you should consult Table 2J regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches. 
• 
If your Bakery Item contains fruit, you should consult Table 2H regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical 
hazards for Fruits and Vegetables. 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 81  
 
 
Table 2B: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Beverage Items 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Non-dairy 
Cocoa/ 
Chocolate 
1 
- Ready-to-Drink 
- Powdered  
Ambient and 
Refrigerated 
 
 
X 
X 
X1 
 
Includes plant-based 
chocolate/ cocoa 
flavored products 
Coffee 
2 
- Raw and Roasted 
Beans/ Whole or 
Ground  
- Single Serve 
- Ready-to-Drink 
- Powdered 
- Freeze-Dried 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
 
Includes flavored and 
unflavored varieties 
Tea 
6 
- Loose Leaf and 
Bagged  
- Tea and Tea 
Substitutes 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Includes plain and 
flavored teas and herbal 
teas 
Carbonated 
Beverages 
7 
Ready-to-Drink / 
Carbonated Plain 
and Flavored 
Ambient 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes plain and 
flavored varieties 
Ground 
Coffee 
Substitutes 
12 
Dry Powdered 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X2 
 
Includes chicory root 
powder, roasted grains 
1 The applicable mycotoxin is ochratoxin. (See FDA Compliance Program 7307.001 (in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) and Codex Code 
of Practice CAC/RCP 69-2009 and CAC/RCP 72-2013 (in Table 6 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance).)  
2 The applicable mycotoxin depends on the grain. For the applicable mycotoxin for a specific grain, see Table 1J.  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 82  
 
 
Table 2C: Food Additives, Color Additives, and GRAS Substances  
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Nutrients 
7 
Vitamins, 
Minerals, and 
Vitamin/Mineral 
Premixes 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
X1 
 
X1 
 
 
The specific vitamin or 
mineral that could be 
contaminated with arsenic 
or lead is not yet identified. 
1 Bair, EC, 2022.  
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 83  
 
 
Table 2D: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Chocolate and Candy  
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Chocolate 
Industrial Products 
1a 
Raw Cocoa 
Beans 
Ambient 
 
 
X 
X 
X1 
 
Cocoa Beans 
Chocolate 
Industrial Products 
1b 
Roasted Cocoa 
Beans and Nibs, 
Cocoa Butter, 
Cocoa Powder 
Ambient 
 
 
X 
X 
X1 
 
Beans and Nibs 
1 The applicable mycotoxin is ochratoxin. (See FDA Compliance Program 7307.001 (in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) and Codex Code 
of Practice CAC/RCP 72-2013 (in Table 6 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance).)  
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 84  
 
 
Table 2E: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Dairy 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
All  
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
All 
Ambient, 
Refrigerated, 
and Frozen 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes all products 
described in Table 1E, as 
well as shelf stable and 
aseptically processed and 
packaged milk and milk 
products that are 
produced in accordance 
with our LACF regulation 
in 21 CFR part 113 
 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 85  
 
 
Food Group 2F: Dressings, Condiments, and Dips 
This Appendix does not include a Table of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Dressings, Condiments, 
and Dips. Instead, for known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Dressings, Condiments, and Dips, you 
should see the Table(s) associated with the ingredients in your Dressing, Condiment or Dip Item. For example:  
• 
If your Dressing, Condiment, or Dip contains dairy ingredients, you should consult Table 2D regarding known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Dairy. 
• 
If your Dressing, Condiment, or Dip contains eggs, you should consult Table 2G regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-
related chemical hazards for Egg and Egg Products. 
• 
If your Dressing, Condiment, or Dip contains flour or a pulse such as chickpeas, you should consult Table 2J regarding known or reasonably 
foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches. 
• 
If your Dressing, Condiment, or Dip contains a fruit or vegetable, you should consult Table 2H regarding known or reasonably foreseeable 
(“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Fruits and Vegetables. 
 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 86  
 
 
Table 2G: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Egg and Egg Products 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Shell Eggs 
1 
Shell Eggs - Raw 
and Pasteurized 
in Shell 
Refrigerated 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes all shell eggs  
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 87  
 
 
Table 2H: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Fruits and Vegetables1 
Category 
#1 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Fruits and 
vegetables 
All 
Whole RAC 
or processed 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
All fruits and vegetables 
Fruits and 
vegetables 
All 
Whole RAC 
or processed 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
Includes spinach, lettuce, 
potatoes, beets  
Fruits and 
vegetables 
All 
Whole RAC 
or processed 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
Includes sweet potatoes, 
carrots, spinach, dried 
plums (prunes), potatoes, 
mushrooms, garlic 
Fruits and 
vegetables 
All 
Whole RAC 
or processed 
Ambient or 
Refrigerated 
 
 
 
 
X2 
 
Includes apple products, 
dried fruits, dried beans and 
peas 
1 Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazards generally apply to a raw agricultural commodity regardless of whether and how it 
is processed. Therefore, each row in Table 2H applies to “fruits and vegetables,” regardless of whether they are whole RACs or processed as 
described in Table 1H regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) biological hazards. The difference between each row is the chemical 
hazard that is listed as a known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) chemical hazard.  
2 For apples and apple products, the applicable mycotoxin is patulin. For dried fruits the applicable mycotoxins are aflatoxin (dried figs) (FDA Import 
Alert 23-14; see Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance) or ochratoxin A (raisins, dried figs) (FDA Compliance Program 7307.001; 
see Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance). For dried vegetable (beans and peas) the applicable mycotoxin is ochratoxin A (FDA 
Compliance Program 7307.001; see Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance).  
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 88  
 
 
Table 2I: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Game Meat Products 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Raw Game Meat 
All 
Ground and Not 
Ground Game 
Meat 
Refrigerated or 
Frozen 
X1 
 
 
 
 
 
Bison Steak, Deer 
Shoulder, Rabbit, and Birds 
(Pheasant, Grouse, Quail) 
1 The SMEs identified known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) drug residue hazards in the broad category “Game Meat Products” but did not 
differentiate between species (e.g., bison, deer, rabbit). You can search for drug approvals by species using the advanced search feature on our 
website at https://animaldrugsatfda.fda.gov/. (See Table 8 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance.) You can find tolerances for approved 
animal drugs in 21 CFR Part 556. 
 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 89  
 
 
Table 2J: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and 
Starches 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Grains, 
Non-Rice 
1 
Whole and 
milled grains 
(e.g., flour and 
bran) 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
X 
Wheat, Rye, Sorghum, Oats, Barley, Triticale, 
Buckwheat, Corn, Amaranth, Millet, Quinoa 
(RACs and milled grain products) 
Rice, 
Milled Rice 
Products 
2b 
Rice (whole 
and milled) 
and rice 
products 
Ambient 
 
X 
X 
 
X2 
X 
White or Brown Rice, Rice protein, 
Sticky/sweet Rice, Basmati Rice, Jasmine 
Rice, Arborio rice, Rice-based noodles, Rice-
based cereal 
Other 
Milled 
Products 
5a 
Root flours 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X3 
 
Potato flour, Cassava flour 
Other 
Milled 
Products 
5a 
Root flours 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Sweet potato flour, yam flour 
Pulses 
6a 
Whole (dried) 
or processed 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X4 
X 
Soybean, Kidney, Pinto, Navy, Azuki, Mung, 
Black Gram, Dried Peas; Chickpea; 
Cowpea/Black-eyed Pea; Lentil; Winged Bean 
1 The applicable mycotoxins are ochratoxin A (oats, wheat, barley), aflatoxin (dried corn), fumonisins (dried corn), and deoxynivalenol/ vomitoxin (wheat, barley) 
(See CPG Sec. 555.400 (in Table 3 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance); Advisory Levels for Deoxynivalenol (DON) in Finished Wheat Products for 
Human Consumption and Grains and Grain By-Products used for Animal Feed (in Table 4 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance); FDA Compliance 
Program 7307.001 (in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance); and Import Alert 23-14 (in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this 
guidance).) 
2 Aflatoxin is the applicable mycotoxin (only for raw brown rice). 
3 Cassava contains cyanogenic glycosides that produce cyanide. Depending on the level of cyanogenic glycosides, cassava is detoxified by heat processing alone, 
or by a combination of heat processing and food preparation techniques such as peeling, soaking, sun-drying, and scraping off the outer layer to leach out the 
cyanide (Canadian Food Inspection Agency, 2019).  

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 90  
 
 
4 The applicable mycotoxin is ochratoxin A for dried peas and beans. (See FDA Compliance Program 7307.001 (in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this 
guidance).) 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 91  
 
 
 
Table 2K: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Nuts and Seeds 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Nuts 
1a 
Peanuts, Raw 
and treated 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
X 
Peanuts 
Nuts 
1c 
Tree Nuts, Raw 
and treated 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
 
All tree nuts 
Nuts 
1c 
Tree Nuts, Raw 
and treated 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Cashews and pecans 
Edible Seeds 
2a 
Raw and treated 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
X 
Melon, Pumpkin, Sunflower 
Edible Seeds 
2a 
Raw and treated 
Ambient 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
Sunflower 
1 The applicable mycotoxin is aflatoxin. (See CPG Sec. 570.200, CPG Sec. 570.375, and CPG Sec. 570.500 in Table 3 in section VI of the Introduction of this 
guidance.) 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 92  
 
 
Table 2L: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Oils and Oil Products 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Oil products 
1a 
1d 
Highly refined cooking 
oils and infused oils  
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See the discussion in section 
A1.7.2 that the chemical 
hazards 3-monochloropropane-
1,2-diol esters (3-MCPDEs) and 
glycidyl esters (GEs) have the 
potential to form in refined oils 
during food production, 
particularly at high temperature. 
Oil products 
1a 
Cooking oils that are 
not highly refined 
(e.g., produced 
through cold pressing) 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Includes olive oil 
Oil products 
1a 
1d 
Cooking oils and 
infused oils that are 
not highly refined 
(e.g., produced 
through cold pressing) 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X1 
 
Includes cold-pressed oil and 
flavored oils from peanuts, tree 
nuts, sesame, sunflower, and 
melon 
1 The applicable mycotoxin is aflatoxin (Einolghozati et al., 2021; Sahin et al., 2022; and Table 2K).  
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 93  
 
 
Food Group 2M: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Snack Foods 
This Appendix does not include a Table of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Snack Foods. Instead, 
for known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Snack Foods, you should see the Table(s) associated with the 
ingredients in your Snack Food. For example:  
• 
If your Snack Food contains chocolate, you should consult Table 2D regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Chocolate and Candy. 
• 
If your Snack Food contains a fruit or vegetable, you should consult Table 2H regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-
related chemical hazards for Fruits and Vegetables. 
• 
If your Snack Food contains wheat flour, you should consult Table 2J regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches. 
• 
If your Snack Food contains peanuts or tree nuts, you should consult Table 2K regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-
related chemical hazards for Nuts and Seeds. 
 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 94  
 
 
Food Group 2N: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Soups and Sauces 
This Appendix does not include a Table of known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Soups and Sauces. 
Instead, for known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Soups and Sauces, you should see the Table(s) 
associated with the ingredients in your Soup or Sauce. For example:  
• 
If your Soup or Sauce contains a dairy item, you should consult Table 2E regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Dairy. 
• 
If your Soup or Sauce contains a fruit or vegetable, you should consult Table 2H regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-
related chemical hazards for Fruits and Vegetables. 
• 
If your Soup or Sauce contains wheat flour, you should consult Table 2J regarding known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related 
chemical hazards for Grains, Pulses, Flours, and Starches. 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 95  
 
 
Table 2O: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Spices and Herbs 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Spices 
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or Whole 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Includes capsicums (which include 
cayenne, chili, paprika), cumin  
Spices 
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or Whole 
Ambient 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
Includes chili powder, cumin, 
oregano 
Spices 
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or Whole 
Ambient 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
Includes chilis/chili powder, cumin, 
oregano 
Spices 
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or Whole 
Ambient 
 
 
 
X1 
 
 
Includes aniseed, chili powder, 
cinnamon, coriander, cumin, curry, 
ginger, five spice, red hot pepper, 
turmeric 
Spices 
1 
Dried, Ground, 
Cracked, or Whole 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
X2 
 
Includes capsicums (which include 
cayenne, chili, paprika), ginger, 
nutmeg, turmeric  
Herbs 
2a 
Fresh and Dried 
Ambient 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Includes basil, bay leaves, 
tarragon, thyme 
1  See Ishida et al. 2022. 
2 The applicable mycotoxins are aflatoxin and ochratoxin A. (See Compliance Program 7307.001 in Table 5 in section VI of the Introduction of this guidance; Iha 
and Truckness, 2019; and Kabak and Dobson, 2017.) 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 96  
 
 
 
Table 2P: Known or reasonably foreseeable (“potential”) food-related chemical hazards for Food Sweeteners (Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
Category 
# 
Subcategory 
Storage 
Conditions 
Drug residues 
Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Lead 
Mercury 
Mycotoxins/ 
Natural toxins 
Pesticides 
Comments 
Food Sweeteners 
(Nutritive and 
Non-Nutritive) 
1c 
Honey (Liquid) 
Ambient 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Includes all 
varieties and forms 
(e.g., comb, 
strained, whipped) 
 
 

Contains Non-binding Recommendations 
Draft-Not for Implementation 
 
Appendix 1 (Known or Reasonably Foreseeable Hazards (“Potential Hazards”)) - Page 97  
 
 
This page intentionally left blank. 
 
