REVIEW ARTICLE
Anti-cancer potential of ﬂavonoids: recent trends and future
perspectives
Priya Batra • Anil K. Sharma
Received: 14 December 2012 / Accepted: 15 January 2013 / Published online: 12 February 2013
 The Author(s) 2013. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Cancer is a major public health concern in both
developed and developing countries. Several plant-derived
anti-cancer agents including taxol, vinblastine, vincristine,
the campothecin derivatives, topotecan, irinotecan and
etoposide are in clinical use all over the world. Other
promising anti-cancer agents include ﬂavopiridol, rosco-
vitine, combretastatin A-4, betulinic acid and silvestrol.
From this list one can well imagine the predominance of
polyphenols, ﬂavonoids and their synthetic analogs in the
treatment of ovarian, breast, cervical, pancreatic and
prostate cancer. Flavonoids present in human diet comprise
many polyphenolic secondary metabolites with broad-
spectrum
pharmacological
activities
including
their
potential role as anti-cancer agents. A positive correlation
between ﬂavonoids-rich diet (from vegetables and fruits)
and lower risk of colon, prostate and breast cancers lead to
a question that whether ﬂavonoids mediate the protective
effects as chemopreventive agents or can interact with
different genes and proteins to play role in chemotherapy.
The current review emphasizes onto the therapeutic
potential of ﬂavonoids and their synthetic analogs as anti-
cancer agents by providing new insights into the factors,
regulation and molecular mechanisms along with their
signiﬁcant protein interactions.
Keywords
Flavonoids  Anti-cancer  Breast cancer 
Therapeutic potential  Health beneﬁts  Dietary ﬂavonoids
Introduction
Cancer chemoprevention, by the use of natural, dietary or
synthetic agents that can reverse, suppress or prevent carcin-
ogenic progression, has become an appealing strategy to
combat the dogma associated with increasing cases of cancers
worldwide (Tsao and Edward 2004). Epidemiological studies
point to the fact that long-term consumption of diet rich in
foods and vegetables reduces the risk of chronic diseases
especially cancer (Wallstrom et al. 2000; Parr and Bolwell
2000; Arts and Hollman 2005; Patel 2008; Xiao et al. 2011).
Such diets can minimize—exposure to deleterious sub-
stances, activation of procarcinogens and can maximize the
intake of certain beneﬁcial nutrients like isothiocyanates,
unsaturated fatty acids, polyphenolic terpenoids (PPT), sele-
nium, terpenes, etc. (Franco et al. 2004; Johnson 2004).
Historical perspective
In 1930, a new substance was isolated from oranges that can
reduce the capillary permeability and is believed to be a
member of a new class of vitamins hence designated as vita-
min P, however, later on this substance was identiﬁed as a
ﬂavonoid (rutin). Flavonoids drew greater attention with the
decreased incidence of cardiovascular diseases, in spite of a
greater saturated fat intake in Mediterranean population,
whichwasassociatedwithredwineconsumption(Renaudand
de Lorgeril 1992). Flavonoids belong to a very vast group of
plant secondary metabolites with variable phenolic structures
and are found in fruits, vegetables, grains, bark, roots, stems,
ﬂowers, tea and wine (Nijeveldt et al. 2001). In plants,
ﬂavonoids are performing a variety of functions including
pollination, seed dispersal, pollen tube growth, resorption of
mineral nutrients, tolerance to abiotic stresses, protection
against ultraviolet and allelopathic interactions, etc. (Gould
P. Batra  A. K. Sharma (&)
Department of Biotechnology, MMEC,
Maharishi Markandeshwar University, Mullana,
Ambala, Haryana 133207, India
e-mail: anibiotech18@gmail.com
123
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
DOI 10.1007/s13205-013-0117-5

and Lister 2005; Samanta et al. 2011; Hassan and Mathesius
2012). More than 8,000 different compounds of polyphenols
have been known and that can be further subdivided into ten
different general classes (Ververidis et al. 2007; Harborne and
Williams 2000; Chahar et al. 2011). Flavonoids are part of this
family and have more than 4,000 varieties (Harborne 1994).
Isoﬂavonoids (phytoestrogens or non-steroidal estrogens)
such as the soy isoﬂavones—genistein and daidzein, have also
been known for their therapeutic signiﬁcance particularly in
the protection of human health (Wiseman et al. 2000; Stevens
and Page 2004; Ørgaard and Jensen 2008; Xiao 2008; Og-
buewu et al. 2010; Wiseman etal. 2002).There are a varietyof
factorssuchasspecies,variety,climate,degreeofripenessand
post harvest storage which inﬂuence the concentration of
ﬂavonoids in foods (Holland et al. 1995; Robards and Antol-
ovich 1997; Pascual-Teresa et al. 2000; Modak et al. 2011).
Flavonoids have a remarkable reducing ability and ability to
interact with proteins (Haslam 1996; Havsteen 2002; Liu et al.
2010; McRae and Kennedy 2011). This review focus on bio-
chemical studies carried out to analyze the possible health
effects of ﬂavonoids and to assess their potential in the pre-
vention of degenerative diseases or their therapeutic value as
potential drugs.
Structural insight and classiﬁcation
Polyphenolic terpenoids are the most extensively studied
ﬂavonoids which have a characteristic C6–C3–C6 struc-
ture. The chemical structure of ﬂavonoids is based on a C15
skeleton with a CHROMANE ring bearing a second aro-
matic ring B in position 2, 3 or 4.
In a few cases, the six-membered heterocyclic ring C
occurs in an isomeric open form or is replaced by a ﬁve-
membered ring.
AURONES (2-benzyl-coumarone) 
They have been further subdivided into ﬂavones,
ﬂavonols, ﬂavanones, ﬂavanols, anthocyanins and isoﬂav-
ones based on the nature of C3 element (Fig. 1). Different
groups of ﬂavonoids and their dietary sources are men-
tioned in Table 1. Flavonoids, especially ﬂavanols, ﬂavo-
nols and anthocyanins are relatively abundant in human
diet and possibly involved in prevention of cancers, car-
diovascular diseases and neurodegeneration (Bazzano et al.
2002; Clifford 2004; Atmani et al. 2009; Fang et al. 2010;
Xiao et al. 2011).
Synthesis
The ﬂavonoids are formed in plants and participate in the
light-dependent phase of photosynthesis during which they
catalyze electron transport (Das 1994). They are synthe-
sized from the aromatic amino acids—phenylalanine and
tyrosine, together with acetate units (Heller and Forkmann
1993). Phenylalanine and tyrosine are converted to cin-
namic acid and parahydroxycinnamic acid, respectively, by
the action of phenylalanine and tyrosine ammonia lyases
(Wagner and Farkas 1975). Cinnamic acid (or parahydr-
oxycinnamic acid) condenses with acetate units to form the
cinnamoyl structure of the ﬂavonoids (Fries rearrange-
ment). A variety of phenolic acids, such as caffeic acid,
ferulic acid, and chlorogenic acid, are cinnamic acid
derivatives. There is then alkali-catalyzed condensation of
an
ortho-hydroxyacetophenone
with
a
benzaldehyde
derivative generating chalcones and ﬂavonones (Fig. 2),
as well as a similar condensation of an ortho-hydroxy-
acetophenone with a benzoic acid derivative (acid chlo-
ride or anhydride), leading to 2-hydroxyﬂavanones and
ﬂavones (Heller and Forkmann 1993). The synthesis of
chalcones and anthocyanidins has been described in detail
by Dhar (1994). Biotransformation of ﬂavonoids in the
gut can release these cinnamic acid (phenolic acids)
derivatives (Scheline 1991). In terms of their biosynthe-
sis, the phenyl propanoid pathway produces a range of
secondary metabolites such as phenolic acids, lignins,
lignans and stilbenes using phenyl alanine and tyrosine as
the precursor. After tannins, ﬂavonoid glycosides are by
far the most common dietary sources of ﬂavonoids.
Usually 110–121 mg/day of ﬂavonoids has been recom-
mended as a healthy diet for an adult (Hertog et al. 1992,
1993a, 1993b).
Metabolism
The fate of orally and parenterally administered ﬂavonoids
in mammals was reviewed by Grifﬁths and Barrow (1972)
and later by Hollman and Katan (1998). Considerable
information is available regarding the metabolism of
ﬂavonoids in animals and to a very limited extent in
440
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

humans (Hackett 1986; Scheline 1991). Hertog et al.
(1992) measured the content of potentially anti-carcino-
genic ﬂavonoids of 28 vegetables, wine, and fruits fre-
quently consumed in The Netherlands and the measured
ﬂavonoids were quercetin, kaempferol, myricetin, apige-
nin, and luteolin. The mean daily intake of these ﬁve anti-
oxidant ﬂavonoids was 23 mg/day, which exceeds the
intake of other familiar anti-oxidants such as b-carotene
(2–3 mg/day) and vitamin E (7–10 mg/day) and is about
one-third the average intake of vitamin C (70–100 mg/day)
(Hertog et al. 1993b). Quercetin is the most important
contributor to the estimated intake of ﬂavonoids, mainly
from the consumption of apples and onions (Knekt et al.
1996; Gibellini et al. 2011; Giuliani et al. 2008). It is
extremely difﬁcult to estimate the daily human intake of
ﬂavonoids, especially because of the lack of standardized
analytical
methods
(Scalbert
and
Williamson
2000).
However, the average daily intake of the most abundant
ﬂavonoids, catechins, is *100 mg (Perez-Vizcaino et al.
2009). Similar to daily intake, it is also quite complex to
assess and quantify the bioavailability of ﬂavonoids (Russo
2007). In countries such as Japan, Korea, China, and Tai-
wan, the mean daily intake of soy products has been esti-
mated to be in the range of 10–50 g compared to only
1–3 g in the United States (Messina et al. 1994).
Flavonoid pharmacokinetics is complex, since they are
usually contained as glucosides in fruits and vegetables,
cleaved and glucuronated during uptake. Glucuronides may
be metabolized, or stored or set free as aglycones by tissue-
speciﬁc glucuronidases; thus, plasma concentration may
not always be a good measure of bioavailability (Seelinger
et al. 2008). Most ﬂavonoids, except catechins, exist in
nature as glycosides. Moreover, at least quercetin gluco-
sides were absorbed better than the aglycone quercetin-b-
glucoside (Hollman and Katan 1998). Finally, supple-
mentation of the diet should more appropriately use ﬂa-
vonoid glycosides instead of aglycones. However, this has
been questioned by other researchers (Manach et al. 1997).
The role of ﬂavonoid glycosylation in facilitating absorp-
tion is questioned by the fact that catechin, which is not
glycosylated in nature, is absorbed relatively efﬁciently
(Okushio et al. 1996). Because the half-lives of conjugated
Fig. 1 Subclasses of ﬂavonoids
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
441
123

ﬂavonoids are rather long (23–28 h) (Young et al. 1999),
accumulation may occur with regular intakes, which may
in turn result in sufﬁciently active ﬂavonoid concentrations
(Nijeveldt et al. 2001). Flavanoid bioavailability and the
mechanism by which ﬂavonoids are absorbed from intes-
tine and metabolized via microbial catabolism, conjugation
in liver and enterocytes have been studied by a number of
workers (Hollman and Katan 1999; Scalbert and Wil-
liamson 2000, Hollman 2004; Passamonti et al. 2009).
Studies in human and animals have indicated that some
PPT (for example cinnamate conjugates, ﬂavanols, quer-
cetin glucosides) can be absorbed in the small intestine
(Olthof et al. 2000, 2003; Nardini et al. 2002; Cermak et al.
2004) while quercetin, quercetin galactoside, rutin, na-
ringenin-7-glucoside and many others are not. Mechanism
of absorption has not been completely elucidated while the
membrane transport of ﬂavonoids is a fundamental part of
their bioavailability in both plant and animal organisms,
and current knowledge suggests the involvement of both
ATP-dependent pumps and ATP-independent transporters
(Passamonti et al. 2009).
Depending on PPT subclass, only 5–10 % of amount
consumed is absorbed in small intestine and major part of
that absorbed in the duodenum enters the circulation as
methylated,
sulfate-conjugated,
glucuronide-conjugated
and glycine-conjugated forms (Kroon et al. 2004). The rest
90–95 % of total PPT ingested plus any mammalian glu-
curonide excreted through bile pass to the colon where they
are metabolized by gut microﬂora. Transformations may be
extensive, and include the removal of sugars, removal of
phenolic hydroxyls, ﬁssion of aromatic rings, hydrogena-
tion, and metabolism to carbon dioxide, possibly via oxa-
loacetate (Walle et al. 2001). A substantial range of
microbial metabolites has been identiﬁed, including phe-
nols and aromatic acids, phenolic acids, or lactones pos-
sessing 0, 1, or 2 phenolic hydroxyls and up to ﬁve carbons
in the side chain (Clifford and Brown 2006). The elimi-
nation half-lives are very variable, ranging from as low as
1 h (Meng et al. 2001) to values in excess of 20 h (Olthof
et al. 2003).
Flavonoid as anti-cancer agents
Epidemiological studies
A huge number of epidemiological studies have been
conducted to prove the protective effect of ﬂavonoids
against cancer. Increased consumption of lignans and
greater plasma concentrations of their metabolites have
been linked with reduced incidence of estrogen-related
cancers in some (Pietinen et al. 2001; Dai et al. 2002;
Boccardo et al. 2004; McCann et al. 2004) but not all
studies, (Kilkkinen et al. 2004; Zeleniuch-Jacquotte et al.
2004) and a prospective study was equivocal (den Ton-
kelaar et al. 2001). It has been suggested that this incon-
sistency might have a genetic basis (McCann et al. 2002).
Increased consumption of isoﬂavones has also been asso-
ciated with decreased risk of estrogen-related cancers and
vascular diseases (Arai et al. 2000; Birt et al. 2001). Data
Table 1 Different groups of ﬂavonoids and their dietary sources
Flavonoid
group
Subgroup
Major sources
Anti-cancer properties
Flavanols
Flavan-3-ols: catechin, gallocatechin,
catechin-3-gallate, epicaechin,
epigallocatechin
Flavan-4-ols
Flavan-3,4-diols
Chocolate, green and black tea,
beans, cherry, strawberries, cocoa,
apple
Human oral, rectal and prostate cancer
Flavones
Apigenin, chrysin, luteolin
Parsley, celery, capsicum, pepper,
broccoli
Lung cancer, leukemia, stomach, colon,
thyroid, oral and laryngeal cancer, breast
cancer
Flavonol: kaempherol, myricetin,
quercetin, rutin
Brussel sprouts, apples, onion, curly
kale, leek, beans, cherries
Flavanones: eriodictyol, hesperitin,
naringenin
Orange juice, grape fruit juice,
lemon juice
Flavanonols: taxifolin
Milk thistle, red onion, acai palm,
Siberian larch tree
Anthocyanidins Cyanidin, delphinidin, malvidin,
petunidin, peonidin, pelargonidin
Aubergine, black berries, black
currant, blue berries
Colorectal cancer
Isoﬂavonoids
Isoﬂavones: daidzein, genistein, glycitein
Isoﬂavane: equol
Soy ﬂour, soy beans, soy milk, miso,
tempeh, beer
Metabolized from daidzein by
intestinal bacteria
Breast cancer, prostate cancer, colon, kidney
and thyroid cancer
442
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

from four cohort studies and six case–control studies,
which have examined associations of ﬂavonoid intake with
cancer risk revealed that ﬂavonoids, especially quercetin,
may reduce the risk of lung cancer in two studies but a non-
signiﬁcant increased risk in a third study. High versus low
quercetin and kaempferol intakes were associated with 40
and 50 % reduction in risk, respectively, for stomach
cancer. There was no statistically signiﬁcant association of
any ﬂavonoids with either bladder cancer or breast cancer
risk (Neuhouser 2004). In a network of multicentric Italian
case–control studies including about 10,000 incident, his-
tologically conﬁrmed cases of selected cancers and over
16,000 controls, the association of ﬂavonoids, proantho-
cyanidins and cancer risk was evaluated by Rossi et al.
(2010). It was found that total ﬂavonoids, ﬂavanones, and
ﬂavonols were inversely related to oral and laryngeal
cancers (ORs, respectively, 0.56 and 0.60 for total ﬂavo-
noids; 0.51 and 0.60 for ﬂavanones; and 0.62 and 0.32 for
ﬂavonols).
Flavonols
were
also
inversely
related
to
laryngeal cancer (OR 0.64), whereas ﬂavanones were
inversely related to esophageal cancer (OR 0.38). A
reduced risk of colorectal cancer was found for high intake
of anthocyanidins (OR 0.67), ﬂavonols (OR 0.64), ﬂavones
(OR 0.78), and isoﬂavones (OR 0.76). Inverse relations
with breast cancer were found for ﬂavones (OR 0.81) and
ﬂavonols (OR 0.80). Flavonols (OR 0.63) and isoﬂavones
(OR 0.51) were inversely associated to ovarian cancer,
whereas ﬂavonols (OR 0.69) and ﬂavones (OR 0.68) were
inversely associated to renal cancer. No association
between ﬂavonoids and prostate cancer emerged, whereas
inverse association was found between proanthocyanidins
and colorectal cancer. These associations appeared stronger
for proanthocyanidins with a higher degree of polymeri-
zation (Rossi et al. 2010).
In the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
and Nutrition study (Nothlings et al. 2008), the intake of
vegetables, legumes, and fruit was signiﬁcantly associated
with reduced risks of CVD mortality and mortality due to
Fig. 2 Pathway of biosynthesis
of ﬂavonoids
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
443
123

non-CVD/non-cancer
causes
[RR
0.88
(95 %
CI
0.81–0.95) and 0.90 (0.82–0.99), respectively] in a diabetic
population comprising [10,000 individuals. High urinary
excretion of both equol and enterolactone (mammalian
metabolite of plant lignans) has been found to be associated
with a signiﬁcant decrease in breast cancer risk in an epi-
demiological case–control study in breast cancer patients
(Ingram et al. 1997). Although this could suggest the
possible importance of isoﬂavonoid and lignan metabolism
in decreased breast cancer risk, the phytoestrogen excretion
observed may just be a marker of dietary differences
(Barnes 1998). Knekt and co-workers also estimated that
men with higher quercetin intake had a lower lung cancer
incidence, and men with higher myricetin intakes had a
lower prostate cancer risk (Knekt et al. 2002).
The intake of ﬂavonoids is not inversely related with
bladder cancer or breast cancer risk in some of the studies
(Garcia-Closas et al. 1999; Peterson et al. 2003). Quercetin
has been reported to prevent renal cell cancer among male
smokers (Wilson et al. 2009). A case–control study con-
ducted between 1994 and 2002 in four Italian areas to study
the relation between major ﬂavonoid classes and renal cell
carcinoma by Bosetti et al. 2007 revealed that ﬂavonols
and ﬂavones were inversely related to the risk of renal
cancer. A cohort of 34,651 postmenopausal cancer-free
women revealed inverse relation between catechin intake
and rectal cancer (Arts et al. 2002).
Population-based case–control studies carried out sepa-
rately in Hawaii, Uruguay and Spain suggested an inverse
association between different cancers (oral cavity, pharynx,
larynx and esophagus, lungs, stomach) and total intake of
ﬂavonoids, beta-carotene and vitamin E (Le Marchand et al.
2000; Stefani et al. 1999a, b; Garcia-Closas et al. 1999).
Inverse association of cholangiocarcinomas (CAC) with
ﬂavan-3-ols, anthocyanidins and total ﬂavonoids has been
reported and ﬂavones may be inversely associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HCC) risk (Lagiou et al.
2008). A statistically signiﬁcant association between high-
est ﬂavonoid intake and reduced risk of developing lung
cancer has been reported whereby an increase in ﬂavonoid
intake of 20 mg/day was associated with a 10 % decreased
risk of developing lung cancer (Tang et al. 2009).
The studies on tea, ﬂavonoids and lung cancer risk
indicated a small beneﬁcial association, particularly among
never-smokers. More well-designed cohort studies are
needed to strengthen the evidence on effects of long-term
exposure to physiological doses of dietary ﬂavonoids (Arts
2008). Consumption of soy foods rich in isoﬂavones has
been weakly associated with reduced colon and prostate
cancer (Adlercreutz 2002; Guo et al. 2004; Holzbeierlein
et al. 2005; Goetzl et al. 2007). A protective effect of
ﬂavonoids in association with vitamin C has been shown
on esophageal cancer using data from case–control study
conducted in northern Italy (Rossi et al. 2007). Flavonoid-
rich diet may decrease pancreatic cancer risk in male
smokers not consuming supplemental alpha-tocopherol and
beta-carotene (Bobe 2008).
In vitro studies
Isoﬂavonoids have biphasic effects on the proliferation of
breast cancer cells in culture; at concentrations [5 mM,
genistein exhibits a concentration-dependent ability to
inhibit both growth factor-stimulated and estrogen-stimu-
lated (reversed by 17b-estradiol) cell proliferation (So et al.
1997). Although genistein is a much better ligand for ERb
than for the ERa (20-fold higher binding afﬁnity) (Kuiper
et al. 1997), it can also act as an estrogen agonist via both
ERa and ERb in some test systems (Kuiper et al. 1998;
Mueller et al. 2004). Furthermore, although genistein binds
to the ligand-binding domain of ERb in a manner similar to
that observed for 17b-estradiol, in the ERb–genistein
complex the AF-2 helix (H12) does not adopt the normal
agonist type position, but instead takes up a similar ori-
entation to that induced by ER antagonists such as ra-
loxifene (Pike et al. 1999). This suboptimal alignment of
the transactivation helix is in keeping with the reported
partial agonist activity of genistein via ERb in human
kidney cell (Barkhem et al. 1998).
Anti-cancer activity of methanolic ﬂower extract of
Tecoma stans (METS) was evaluated by both in vitro (Vero
and Hep 2 cell lines) and in vivo (using Ehrlich ascites
carcinoma tumor model) methods and compared with
5-ﬂurouracil.
A signiﬁcant dose-dependent anti-tumor
activity was indicated (Kameshwaran et al. 2012). Enri-
ched ginger extract exhibited higher anti-cancer activity on
MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines with IC 50 value 34.8 and
25.7 lg/ml for two varieties. IC50 values for MDA-MB-
231 were 32.5 and 30.2 lg/ml for rhizome extract of two
varieties (Rahman et al. 2011). Luteolin-7-methyl ether
isolated from leaves of Blumea balsemifera showed strong
cytotoxicity against human lung cancer cell lines (NCI-
H187) with IC 50 of 1.29 lg/ml and moderate toxicity
against oral cavity cancer cell lines (KB) with IC 50 of
17.83 lg/ml (Saewan et al. 2011).
In vitro and in vivo studies on anti-cancer activity of
ﬂavonoids isolated from a herbal formulation revealed IC
50 of 24.948, 31.569 and 6.923 lg/ml, respectively, on
three cancer cell lines MCF-7, Hep G-2 and ES-2 with
dose-dependent inhibitory effect on hepatocellular carci-
noma in mice (Liu et al. 2011). Broccolini leaf ﬂavonoids
(BLF) possess a dose-dependent anti-proliferative effects
on four human cancer cell lines (SW480, HepG2, Hela, and
A549) and apoptosis induction activity on SW480 cell line.
Thus, the hybrid species Broccolini could be considered as
a functional vegetable with potential in assisting for the
444
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

treatment of four human cancers examined (Wang and
Zhang 2012).
Apigenin inhibited skin papillomas and showed the
tendency to decrease conversion of papillomas to carcino-
mas (Wei et al. 1990). Luteolin has been shown to penetrate
into human skin, making it also a candidate for the pre-
vention and treatment of skin cancer (Seelinger et al. 2008).
Seuﬁet al. (2009) demonstrated that preventive effect of
quercetin on hepato carcinomas in rats by RAPD-PCR,
whereby, it was proved that quercitin exerted a preventive
effect via decreased oxidative stress and decreased anti-
oxidant activity. Dietary proanthocyanidins mostly present
in apples, pears and pulses has been suggested to reduce the
risk of pancreatic cancer by 25 % (Rossi et al. 2010).
Ethanolic extract of propolis has been found to inhibit
urinary bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) cell
proliferation with no cytotoxic effect on normal epithelial
cells (Orsˇolic´ et al. 2010). Genistein inhibited the expres-
sion of micro-RNA 21 in A-498 (RCC) cells and in the
tumors formed after injecting genistein treated A-498 cells
in nude mice besides inhibiting tumor formation (Zaman
et al. 2012).
Kaempferol, a dietary ﬂavonoid is effective in reducing
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in
ovarian cancer cells. It enhances the effect of cisplatin
through downregulation of cMyc in promoting apoptosis of
ovarian cancer cells (Luo et al. 2010). The growth of U14
cervical cancer could be inhibited by Scutellaria baical-
ensis total ﬂavonoids (STF), the cell proliferation inhibited
by arresting cell cycle and cell apoptosis induced by reg-
ulating the expression of Bax and Bcl-2 gene by treatment
of STF (Peng et al. 2011). Some of the Indian medicinal
plants like Ashwagandha, Curcumin, Lithosprmum radix,
green tea, Chinese herb Astragalus and Japanese herb Ju-
zen-Taiho-To have been reported to be effective against
various cell lines of lung cancers (Ravichandiran et al.
2011). A comparison of cytotoxic effect of 11 ﬂavonoids
on chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells indicated that baicalein and my-
ricetin had a speciﬁc cytotoxic effect on leukemia cells
(Romanouskaya and Grinev 2009).
Apoptotic activity of 22 ﬂavonoids and related com-
pounds in leukemic U937 cells were tested by Monasterio
et al. (2004). They reported that ﬂavones but none of the
isoﬂavones induced the apoptotic cell death as determined
by reduction in cell viability, ﬂow cytometery and oligo-
nucleosomal DNA fragmentation. The molecular conse-
quences of apigenin treatment in myeloid and erythroid
subtypes reveal the blocked proliferation of both cell lines
through cell cycle arrest in different phases. JAK/STAT
was one of the major target of apigenin but at the same
time apigenin reduced susceptibility toward the commonly
used therapeutic agent vincristine (Ruela-de-Sousa et al.
2010). A newly synthesized ﬂavonoid III-10 could express
anti-cancer effect on human U937 leukemia cell line
through differentiation induction. The differentiation-rela-
ted proteins phospholipids scramblase 1 (PLSCR1) and
promyelocytic protein (PML) were upregulated after III-10
treatment through activation of protein kinase Cd (Qin
et al. 2012). Quercetin inhibited thyroid cell growth
in association with inhibition of insulin-modulated-PI3-
Kinase-AKT kinase activity. It also decreased TSH-mod-
ulated RNA level of NIS (sodium iodide sympoter) gene
and thereby suggested to be a novel disrupter of thyroid
function which has potential uses in thyroid cancers (Gi-
uliani et al. 2008). Chrysin inhibited proliferation of HTH 7
and KAT 18 (anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines) in a dose
and time-dependent manner. A signiﬁcant increase in
cleaved caspase-3, cleaved polyADP ribose polymerase
(PARP) along with a decrease in cyclin D1, Mcl-1 and
XIAP was observed (Phan et al. 2011). BNF (b-napthof-
lavone) showed a moderate anti-proliferative activity in
WHCO-6 cells and a weak activity in WHCO-1 cells. It
resulted in differential expression of CYP1A1, CYP1A2
and CYP1B1 (Molepo 2010).
In vivo studies
In vivo studies using animal models have suggested the
protective effect of ﬂavonoids against initiation as well as
tumor progression. Animal model studies have provided the
initial experimental evidence that soy can prevent breast
cancer (Barnes 1998; Messina et al. 1994). Fermented soy
milk (rich in genistein and daidzein), given to rats at
7 weeks of age, inhibited mammary tumorigenesis induced
by PhIP (2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyri-
dine (Ohta et al. 2000). In syngenetic mice, i.p. adminis-
tration of quercetin and apigenin inhibited growth and
metastatic potential of melanoma cell (B16-BL6) along
with signiﬁcant decrease in their invasion in vitro (Caltag-
irone et al. 2000). A polymethoxy ﬂavonoid, nobiletin,
inhibited the tumor-invasive activity of human ﬁbrosar-
coma HT-1080 cells in the Matrigel model through sup-
pressing the expression of metalloproteases and augmenting
of production of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in
tumor cells (Sato et al. 2002). Furthermore, injection of
prepubertal rats with genistein (500 mg/g body weight) or
estradiol benzoate (500 ng/g body weight) on days 16, 18,
and 20 showed that both treatments resulted in signiﬁcantly
increased mammary gland terminal end buds and increased
ductal branching compared to controls, indicating an ER-
dependent action of genistein in mammary gland prolifer-
ation and differentiation, which could be protective against
mammary cancer (Cotroneo et al. 2002). Overall, these
results indicate that genistein has very complex effects on
carcinogen-induced mammary cancer in the rat model and
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
445
123

great care is required in interpreting these results and
drawing parallels with human breast cancer. Equol has been
found to be a novel anti-androgen that inhibits prostate
growth and hormone feedback in rat studies (Lund et al.
2004). In nude mice with xenografted tumors using HAK-
1B hepatoma cells, luteolin signiﬁcantly inhibited the
growth of the tumors in a dosage-dependent manner by
targetting STAT3 through dual pathways—the ubiquitin-
dependent degradation in Tyr705-phosphorylated STAT3
and the gradual downregulation in Ser727-phosphorylated
STAT3 through inactivation of CDK5, thereby triggering
apoptosis via upregulation in Fas/CD95 (Selvendiran et al.
2006). A ﬂavonoid rich fraction (Fr-6) and a more puriﬁed
proanthocyanidin (PAC) were isolated from cranberry and
both fractions are found to slow the growth of explant tumor
U87 in vivo, PAC inhibited growth of HT-29 and DU145
explants (p \ 0.05), inducing complete regression of two
DU145 tumor explants (Ferguson et al. 2004). A covalent
conjugate of artemisinin (ﬂavonoid from Artemisia annua)
and transferrin (ART-Tf), an iron transport protein in
human, are actively taken up by cancer cells through the
transferrin receptor (TfR)-mediated endocytosis pathway,
and show signiﬁcantly higher anti-cancer activity than
unconjugated artemisinin (Lai et al. 2005; Nakase et al.
2009). Like ART-Tf, artemisinin–peptide conjugates that
are designed to target TfR also showed highly potent and
selective anti-cancer activities (Oh et al. 2009). Although
the generation of free radicals originating from the reaction
of artemisinin with molecular iron is mentioned as one of
the main mechanism for its anti-cancer activity, there are
other mechanisms, crucial for cancer proliferation and
survival that are affected by artemisinins. These mecha-
nisms have been described in a current review (Firestone
and Sundar 2009; Ferreira et al. 2010). Mammographic
breast density can be used as biomarker of estrogenic or
anti-estrogenic effects of a particular treatment on breast
tissue (Atkinson et al. 2004). Consumption of a dietary
supplement that provided red clover-derived isoﬂavones
(26 mg biochanin A, 16 mg formononetin, 1 mg genistein,
and 0.5 mg daidzein) for 12 months did not increase
mammographic breast density in postmenopausal women,
suggesting neither estrogenic nor anti-estrogenic effects, of
this supplement at the dose given, on the breast (Atkinson
et al. 2004). Honeybee propolis and its polyphenolics
exerted an anti-metastatic anti-tumor effect in mice and rats
and considerable cytotoxicity without cross resistance in
both wild-type and chemoresistant human tumor cell lines
suggesting these to be potent adjunct to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy in treatment of cancers (Orsˇolic´ et al. 2010).
Colon cancer risk is inﬂuenced by estrogen exposure;
studies with estrogen receptor a knockout mice indicate that
it may be independent of estrogen receptor a (Guo et al.
2004). Furthermore, in vivo studies in male rats have shown
that genistein decreases the amount of EGF receptor present
in the prostate, indicating that the observed decrease in
tyrosine phosphorylation may be only a secondary effect of
the inﬂuence of genistein on the expression or turnover of
EGF receptor (Dalu et al. 1998). Luteolin can delay or block
the development of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by
protection from carcinogenic stimuli, by inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation, by induction of cell cycle arrest and by
induction of apoptosis via intrinsic and extrinsic signaling
pathways. When compared to other ﬂavonoids, luteolin was
usually among the most effective ones, inhibiting tumor cell
proliferation with IC50 values between 3 and 50 lM
in vitro and in vivo by 5–10 mg/kg i.p., intragastric appli-
cation of 0.1–0.3 mg/kg/d, or as food additive in concen-
trations of 50–200 ppm (Seelinger et al. 2008).
Molecular mechanism of anti-cancer effect
Flavonoids have been very often pointed out as in vitro
enzyme inhibitors and ligands of receptors involved in
signal transduction (Middleton and Kandaswami 1994;
Havsteen 2002; Williams et al. 2004; Brown et al. 2007;
Balasuriya and Rupasinghe 2011). So these ﬂavonoid–
protein interactions together with their anti-oxidant prop-
erties are the key features for their potential health beneﬁts.
Furthermore, some effects may be a result of a combination
of radical scavenging and interaction with enzyme func-
tions. The phenolic nucleus is a structural unit that is
favorable to molecular (non-covalent) interactions with
proteins.
These interactions can be either Vander wall or elec-
trostatic interactions. In former type, the non-polar polar-
izable
aromatic
ring
can
develop
strong
dispersion
interactions with non-polar amino acid residues followed
by simultaneous release of water; while in later type,
H-bonding is the most important electrostatic interaction.
Flavanoid–protein redox reactions and oxidative covalent
coupling may result fom one-or two-electron oxidation of
the ﬂavonoid brought about by autooxidation, scavanging
of reactive oxygen species and enzymatic oxidation. For
some conformationally open proteins (e.g. salivary pro-
teins), binding constants are quite low with polyphenols but
polymerization and condensation of these polyphenols
produces an increase in afﬁnity (Kurisawa et al. 2003; Kim
et al. 2004). It can be due to unspeciﬁc binding along an
extended protein chain or at the surface of globular proteins
(Haslam 1996; Spencer et al. 1988; Xi and Guo 2008).
Inhibition of PKs
Phosphorylation of proteins at OH groups of serine, thre-
onine, and tyrosine residues is an important mechanism of
446
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

intracellular signal transduction involved in various cellu-
lar responses including the regulation of cell growth and
proliferation (Birt et al. 2001; Bridges 2001). The reaction
makes use of ATP as a phosphate donor and is catalyzed by
protein kinases. For instance, growth factor hormones bind
to extracellular domains of large transmembrane receptors
that display a tyrosine kinase moiety in their intracellular
portion. As a consequence of hormone–receptor binding,
the receptor dimerizes and becomes active in the phos-
phorylation of proteins close to the membrane, thereby
triggering a large number of signaling pathways them-
selves involving other PKs, such as PKC, a Ser/Thr PK,
and mitogen-activated PKs (MAPKs). On the other hand,
each phase of the cell cycle, during which the DNA is
replicated and the chromosomes built and then separated, is
characterized by intense bursts of phosphorylation con-
trolled by highly regulated kinases called cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs). A possible mechanism for the potential
anti-carcinogenic effects of ﬂavonoids could be their abil-
ity to inhibit various PKs, thereby inhibiting signal trans-
duction event of cell proliferation.
The isoﬂavone genistein has been shown to inhibit the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor in the submi-
cromolar range by competing with ATP for its binding site
(Rudrabhatla and Rajasekharan 2005; Akiyama et al.
1987). Similarly, butein (20,3,4,40-tetrahydroxychalcone)
appears as a speciﬁc inhibitor of tyrosine kinases (IC50 for
EGF receptor65 mM) acting competitively to ATP and
non-competitively to the phosphate acceptor and having no
afﬁnity for Ser/Thr PKs such as PKC and the cAMP-
dependent PKA (Yang et al. 1998, 2006).
Recently, PKC was shown to be efﬁciently inhibited by
ﬂavones and ﬂavonols having a 30,40-dihydroxy substitu-
tion on the B ring (efﬁcient concentrations 50 in the range
1–10 mM) (Agullo et al. 1997; Gamet-Payrastre et al.
1999) phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K), a lipid kinase
catalyzing phosphorylation of inositol lipids at the D3
position of the inositol ring to form new intracellular lipid
second messengers (Gamet-Payrastre et al. 1999) is also
inhibited by ﬂavonoids.
Consistently, studies with intact cells have shown that
various ﬂavonoids can cause cell cycle arrest in correlation
to their ability to inhibit CDKs (Zi et al.1998; Casagrande
and Darbon 2001). Flavonoids can also modulate the
activity of MAPKs as a possible mechanism for their
potential anti-neurodegenerative action (Schroeter et al.
2001, 2002) and protection against autoimmune, allergic,
and cardiovascular diseases (Yoshizumi et al. 2002; Ahn
et al. 2004). For instance, investigations on intact antigen-
presenting dendritic cells have shown that the MAP kinases
involved in cell maturation (ERK, p38 kinase, JNK) can be
activated by bacterial lipopolysaccharide and that this
activation is strongly inhibited by pretreatment of the cells
by EGCG.61 However, no evidence is provided that the
mechanism actually proceeds via direct EGCG–MAPK
inhibition.
Inhibition of prooxidant enzymes
Formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a major step
in the tumor promotion and progression stages. The
involvement of ROS in tumor progression has been dem-
onstrated in human cells. NADPH oxidase I (NOX 1), an
enzyme that produces superoxide is overexpressed in colon
and prostate cancer cell lines (Fukuyama et al. 2005; Lim
et al. 2005), while its downregulation reverses tumor
growth (Arnold et al. 2007). ROS play important role in
DNA damaging and mutagenic signaling (Poli et al. 2004;
Valko et al. 2004). ROS act as secondary messenger in
several pathways that lead to increase in cell proliferation,
resistance to apoptosis, activation of proto-oncogenes such
as cFOS, cJUN and cMyc. In human hepatoma cells, ROS
modulate the expression of cFOS and cJUN through PKB
pathway (Liu et al. 2002).
Lipoxygenases (LOX), cycloxygenases (COXs), and
xanthine oxidase (XO) are metalloenzymes whose catalytic
cycle involves ROS such as lipid peroxyl radicals, super-
oxide, and hydrogen peroxide. LOXs and COXs catalyze
important steps in the biosynthesis of leucotrienes and
prostaglandins from arachidonic acid, which is an impor-
tant cascade in the development of inﬂammatory responses.
XO catalyzes the ultimate step in purine biosynthesis, i.e.,
the conversion of xanthine into uric acid. XO inhibition is
an important issue in the treatment of gout. Flavonoids may
exert part of their anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatory
activities via direct inhibition of these prooxidant enzymes
(LOXs, COXs, and XO). Similarly, ﬂavonoids can inhibit
ornithine decarboxylase (rate-limiting enzyme in poly-
amine biosynthesis) induced by tumor promoters, and
thereby inhibiting proliferation. Typically, interpretation of
the inhibition studies is complicated because of the possi-
ble combination of distinct inhibition mechanisms: for-
mation of non-covalent enzyme-inhibitor complexes, direct
scavenging by ﬂavonoid anti-oxidants of ROS inside or
outside the catalytic pocket (with simultaneous oxidation
of the ﬂavonoids), chelation of the enzyme metal centers
by the ﬂavonoids, and enzyme inactivation by reactive a-
ryloxyl radicals, quinones, or quinonoid compounds pro-
duced upon ﬂavonoid oxidation that may eventually form
covalent adducts with the enzyme (Olivier and Claire 2005;
Sandhar et al. 2011).
Modulate the metabolism of carcinogen
Activation of a procarcinogen to carcinogen is an important
step in carcinogenesis and can be modulated by ﬂavonoids.
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
447
123

Flavonoids can exert their effect by two possible mecha-
nisms. Firstly, by interacting with phase 1 enzymes
(CyP450) that are involved in metabolic activation of pro-
carcinogens. Second mode of action can be the detoxiﬁ-
cation and elimination of carcinogens via induction of
phase II enzymes such as UDP-glucuronyl transferase,
quinone reductase and glutathione S-transferase.
These heme-containing cytochrome P450 (CYP) mon-
ooxygenases include several isoforms (CYP 1A1, 1A2,
1B1, 3A4, 3A5, etc.) with different tissue distributions and
play a key role in the metabolism of endogenous substrates
(e.g., steroids) and xenobiotics (food components, drugs,
carcinogens, pollutants) (Anzenbacher and Anzenbache-
rova´ 2011; Hodek et al. 2002; Ahmad and Mukhtar 2004).
Indeed, CYPs are responsible for the conversion of some
procarcinogens (e.g., polyaromatic hydrocarbons or PAHs)
into carcinogens (e.g., PAH epoxides). Cytochrome P450
enzymes are a good example of proteins whose function
can be regulated by ﬂavonoids via such diverse mecha-
nisms (Hodek et al. 2002, 2009).
CYP–ﬂavonoid interactions are a good example of the
multiple ways ﬂavonoids can affect enzymatic activities,
i.e., from the regulation of gene expression to direct
binding to the processed enzymes. Flavonoids can induce,
or eventually inhibit, the biosynthesis of CYP 1A1 via
interactions with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a
cytosolic protein that, once activated by a ligand, translo-
cates to the nucleus and, in association with the AhR
translocator, forms a transcription factor for CYP 1A1. For
instance, in human breast cancer cells, quercetin binds to
AhR as an agonist and stimulates gene expression for CYP
1A1 with a parallel increase in CYP 1A1-mediated O-
deethylation of 7-ethoxyresoruﬁn (Ciolino et al. 1999).
This process is strikingly dependent on the hydroxylation
pattern of the B ring since kaempferol (30-deoxyquercetin)
binds AhR as an antagonist (no subsequent activation of
CYP 1A1). It is also highly dependent on the cell type
since, in hepatic cells, quercetin binds to AhR as an
antagonist, thereby inhibiting gene expression for CYP
1A1 and benzo[a]pyrene activation (Kang et al. 1999). This
provides a possible mechanism for the anti-cancer activity
of quercetin. Flavonoids, especially ﬂavones and ﬂavonols,
also directly bind to several CYP isoforms (1A1, 1A2, 1B1,
3A4) involved in xenobiotics metabolism and inhibit
enzyme activity. Structure–activity relationships (Doostdar
et
al.
2000)
show
rather
high
isoform
selectivities
depending on the ﬂavonoid substitution pattern and con-
trasted inhibition mechanisms. Finally, ﬂavonoids are also
able to inhibit CYP19 or aromatase, an enzyme catalyzing
a three-step oxidation sequence resulting in aromatization
of the A ring of male steroid hormones (androgens) to yield
estrogens.
Together
with
ﬂavonoid–estrogen
receptor
binding, this process could be relevant to the prevention of
hormone-dependent breast cancer by ﬂavonoids (Brueg-
gemeier et al. 2001).
Interestingly, 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, another
redox enzyme involved in steroid metabolism, is also
strongly inhibited by 7-hydroxyﬂavonoids (Le Bail et al.
1998). For instance, the ﬂavone apigenin is more potent
at inhibiting 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (IC50
0.3 mM) than aromatase (IC50 2.9 mM) and the iso-
ﬂavone genistein, which is only a weak aromatase inhibi-
tor, inhibits 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase with an
IC50 of 1 mM. The ﬂavonols quercetin, kaempferol,
myricetin, the ﬂavone apigenin, and the biﬂavone biapi-
genin were also reported to inhibit CYP3A4 activity at low
micromolar concentrations in human liver microsomes
(von Moltke et al. 2004).
Xenobiotics, drugs and ﬂavonoids follow the same
course of metabolism. As these compounds are hydro-
phobic in nature, so the ﬁrst step involving the conjugation
of these drugs to increase their hydrophilicity is a key step
in their metabolism. This step is performed by the above
mentioned phase-II enzymes. Flavonoids have been dem-
onstrated to activate these enzymes and thereby increase
detoxiﬁcation and elimination of carcinogens from the
body. UDPglucuronosyltransferases (UGT) use UDP-glu-
curonic acid as a cosubstrate and transfer glucuronic acid to
available substrates thereby making them more water sol-
uble and facilitating their excretion in the urine or bile.
Similarly, sulfotransferases (SULT) catalyze the transfer of
a sulfonate group, glutathione S-transferases (GST) transfer
glutathione and N-acetyltransferases transfer acetyl moiety
to an appropriate substrate. It has been shown that all these
phase II enzymes are affected by ﬂavonoids in cell and
animal models.
An increase in mRNA levels, protein expression and
enzyme activity of UGT isoform 1A1 has been reported in
human Hep G2 cells and human colon carcinoma cells by
chrysin, apigenin, baicalein, diosmetin, quercetin and ka-
empferol (Galijatovic et al. 2001; Walle and Walle 2002;
Sugatani et al. 2004). van der Logt et al. 2003 reported an
increase in UGT activity in intestine and liver by feeding
rats on a diet containing 1 % wt/wt quercetin and 0.5 % wt/
wt ﬂavones. Quercetin signiﬁcantly increased UGT1A1
mRNA in shed enterocytes on in vivo perfusion of human
jejunam and in Caco-2 cells (Petri et al. 2003). A number
of ﬂavonoids including ﬁsetin, galangin, quercetin, ka-
empferol, and genistein represent potent non-competitive
inhibitors of sulfotransferase 1A1 (or P-PST); this may
represent an important mechanism for the chemopreven-
tion of sulfation-induced carcinogenesis (Moon et al.
2006). Dietary intake of citrus limonoids (Perez et al. 2010)
may provide a protective effect against the onset of various
cancers by inducing the activity of certain phase II detox-
ifying enzymes [glutathione S-transferase and NAD(P)H:
448
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

quinone reductase] in speciﬁc organs. Johnson et al. (2009)
analyzed the ability of eriodictyol to activate Nrf2 and
induce the phase II proteins, heme-oxygenase (HO-1),
NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO-1), and the
cellular anti-oxidant glutathione, GSH. They have shown
that ARPE-19 cells that overexpress HO-1 or NQO-1 were
more resistant to oxidative stress-induced cell death than
control cells. Cermak (2008) reviewed ﬂavonoids as potent
inhibitors of cytosolic SULT isoforms. Quercetin inhibited
sulfation of 4-nitrophenol and of several drugs including
salbutamol,
minoxidil,
paracetamol,
apomorphine
in
human liver cytosol (De Santi et al. 2002; Marchetti et al.
2001; Vietri et al. 2002). Quercetin signiﬁcantly affected
the activity of hepatic GST, whereas dietary catechin sig-
niﬁcantly changed NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase-1
activity (26 %) in rats. Changes in GST and NAD(P)H
quinone oxidoreductase-1 activity were partly reﬂected on
mRNA levels (Wiegand et al. 2009).
Inhibition of multidrug resistance
Cancer cells typically overexpress P-glucoprotein (Pgp) or
multidrug resistance associated protein (MRP) which is
ATP-dependent transmembrane transporters capable of
expelling a wide variety of chemically unrelated drugs used
in cancer therapy at the expense of ATP hydrolysis. This
phenomenon is known as multidrug resistance (MDR) and
inhibition of MDR, to prevent drug efﬂux has potential
clinical application during cancer therapy.
Quercetin was shown to efﬁciently inhibit the Pgp-
mediated drug efﬂux by inhibiting the overexpression of
human MDR1 gene (Kioka et al. 1992) and by inhibiting
the ATPase activity required for transport (Shapiro and
Ling 1997). From investigations using a soluble cytosolic
portion of mouse Pgp, which includes the nucleotide- and
drug-binding domains, it was possible to monitor ﬂavonoid
binding by ﬂuorescence as well as its inﬂuence on ATP
binding and the efﬂux of the anti-cancer steroid drug RU
486 (Conseil et al. 1998). Flavones (aglycones) bearing OH
groups at positions 3 and 5 come up as efﬁcient mouse Pgp
ligands with apparent dissociation constants lower than
10 mM. By contrast, the quercetin glycoside rutin, the
ﬂavanone naringenin, and the isoﬂavone genistein have
low afﬁnity for Pgp. Interestingly, ﬂavones and ﬂavonols
behave as bifunctional inhibitors whose binding site over-
lap the vicinal binding sites for both ATP and RU 486.
Those trends were conﬁrmed using a cytosolic portion of
Pgp from the parasite Leishmania tropica (Perez-Victoria
et al. 1999). Flavonoids have been reported to inhibit
ATPase activity, nucleotide hydrolysis and energy-depen-
dent drug interaction with transporter enriched membranes
(Di Pietro et al. 2002). This unique property of reversal of
MDR has been found to enhance doxorubin (DOX)-
induced anti-tumor activity by increasing the DOX con-
centration at target site (Blagosklonny 2001). To study that
how epicatechin gallate, epigallocatechin gallate, genistein,
genistin, naringenin, naringin, quercetin and xanthohumol
will modulate cellular uptake and permeability [P(e)] of
multidrug-resistant substrates, cyclosporin A (CSA) and
digoxin, across Caco-2 and MDCKII-MDR1 cell-transport
models, uptake experiments were perfomed with and
without ﬂavonids. Aglycone ﬂavonoids reduced the P(e) of
CSA to a greater extent than that of digoxin, suggesting
that transport mechanism of CSA can be different from
digoxin (Rodriguez-Proteau et al. 2006). Ofer et al. (2006)
compared the potency of quercetin, isoquercitin, spiraeo-
side, rutin, kaempferol, naringenin, naringin and hesperetin
to inhibit the transport through P-gp transporters (substrate
3H-talinolol) and OCT (substrate 14C-TEA) of Caco-2 cells
and LLC-PK 1 cells, respectively. Six of the investigated
ﬂavonoids reduced the secretory ﬂux of talinolol across
Caco-2 cells but none of the selected ﬂavonoids was able to
replace 3H-talinolol from its binding to P-gp. This might be
due to an interaction with P-gp, but apparently not via
competition at the talinolol binding site of P-gp. The
investigated ﬂavonoids did show potency to inhibit OCT-
mediated transport (IC50-values: quercetin \ kaempfer-
ol  naringenin \ isoquercitrin \ spiraeoside  rutin \
hesperetin \ naringin) may be by the inhibition of mem-
bers of the OCT family.
This ﬂavonoid–ABC-transporter interaction could be
beneﬁcial for poorly absorbed drugs but could also result in
severe drug intoxication, especially drugs with a narrow
therapeutic window (Alvarez et al. 2010). Most of the
studies have demonstrated inhibitory effects of ﬂavonoids
on the substrate efﬂux in cells that either endogenously
expressed these transporters or that were transfected with
them (Morris and Zhang 2006). These ABC-transporter
proteins can affect the oral availability and tissue distri-
bution of the ﬂavonoids also, thereby modifying their
beneﬁcial effects (Brand et al. 2006).
Anti-oxidant properties
In addition to enzymatic oxidation, ﬂavonoid oxidation can
take place via autoxidation (metal-catalyzed oxidation by
dioxygen) and ROS scavenging. The former process can be
related to ﬂavonoid cytotoxicity (ROS production) while
the latter is one of the main anti-oxidant mechanisms. Both
processes may be modulated by ﬂavonoid–protein binding.
Although poorly documented so far, these points could be
important and, for instance, albumin–ﬂavonoid complexes
with an afﬁnity for LDL could act as the true plasma anti-
oxidants participating in the regeneration of a-tocopherol
from the a-tocopheryl radical formed upon scavenging of
LDL-bound lipid peroxyl radicals. In addition, ﬂavonoid–
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
449
123

protein complexation can be expected to provide protection
to the protein against oxidative degradation.
Since lipid peroxidation is clearly related to the onset of
atherosclerosis and the impairment of membrane functions,
the inﬂuence of proteins on the ability of ﬂavonoids to
inhibit lipid peroxidation deserves examination (Peng and
Kuo 2003; Liu et al. 2006; Kumar et al. 2008; Li 2011).
Such investigations have been carried out with BSA and
lecithin liposomes (Heinonen et al. 1998; Sivonova´ et al.
2006). Whereas BSA alone already slows down the for-
mation of lipid hydroperoxides and hexanal, its inﬂuence
on the anti-peroxidizing activity of the selected polyphe-
nols is highly dependent on the polyphenolic structure.
Hence, BSA lowers the inhibition of hydroperoxide for-
mation by catechins and caffeic acid, enhances inhibition
by malvidin and rutin, and leaves essentially unchanged
inhibition by quercetin. No clear interpretation based on
polyphenol–BSA binding can be given. One-electron oxi-
dation of protein-bound phenols to form reactive aryloxyl
radicals is a possible pro-oxidant mechanism, since these
radicals can propagate H-atom or electron transfers within
the protein. In addition to phenol–protein covalent cou-
pling, these phenol-mediated oxidative damages to proteins
could be detrimental to their function as enzymes, recep-
tors, and membrane transporters.
Anti-oxidant properties have been reported for isoﬂav-
ones both in vitro and in vivo (Wei et al. 1995; Wiseman
et al. 1998, 2000; Mitchell et al. 1998). Equol, in model
membrane systems, was a more effective anti-oxidant than
genistein or the parent compound daidzein (Wiseman et al.
1998) and shows structural similarity to the tocopherols.
Daidzein and geinstein showed anti-oxidant action in pri-
mary and cancer lymphocytes (Jurkat cells), both isoﬂav-
ones increased DNA protection against oxidative damage
and decreased lipid peroxidation (Foti et al. 2005). More-
over, a protective effect was achieved at concentrations
that can be achieved in plasma following soy consumption.
An important aspect of cancer risk is the involvement of
the inﬂammatory response, which involves the production
of cytokines and proinﬂammatory oxidants such as the
hypochlorous acid produced by neutrophils and peroxyni-
trite by macrophages, which react with phenolic tyrosine
residues on proteins to form chloro- and nitrotyrosine
(D’Alessandro et al. 2003). It has been reported that neu-
trophil myleloperoxidase chlorinates and nitrates isoﬂav-
ones and enhances their anti-oxidant properties, thus soy
isoﬂavones may have potentially protective beneﬁts at sites
of inﬂammation (D’Alessandro et al. 2003). Anti-oxidant
action could also contribute to anti-cancer ability because
ROS could initiate signal transduction through the mito-
gen-activated
protein
(MAP)
kinases
(Wiseman
and
Halliwell 1996). There have been a number of reports
relating to the possible anti-oxidant effects of isoﬂavone
consumption. Soy isoﬂavone consumption as a soy protein
burger (56 mg isoﬂavones/day for 17 days) decreased
plasma F2-isoprostane concentrations in healthy young
adults (Wiseman et al. 2000). Consumption of a soy iso-
ﬂavone supplement (50 mg isoﬂavones, twice a day for
3 weeks) decreased a biomarker of DNA oxidative damage
(white cell 5-hydroxymethyl-20-deoxyuridine concentra-
tions) but did not alter plasma F2-isoprostane concentra-
tions (Djuric et al. 2001). Furthermore, consumption of soy
protein (110 mg isoﬂavones/day for 4 weeks) decreased
plasma peroxide concentrations and increased total anti-
oxidant status but did not effect a biomarker of oxidative
DNA damage (Bazzoli et al. 2002). It is of considerable
interest that widely differing effects in relation to the
potential beneﬁts to human health are frequently reported
for isoﬂavones consumed within the food matrix in soy
foods, compared to those consumed in capsule or tablet
form as dietary supplements.
Anti-angiogenesis
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, is an
important process which is regulated by endogenous
angiogenic and angiostatic factors. Any alteration in this
tightly regulated process can lead to a persistent and
uncontrolled growth and metastasis of tumors. Flavanoids
have been reported as angiogenesis inhibitors (Tosetti et al.
2002). These inhibitors can cause lack of diffusion of
nutrients and oxygen to rapidly growing cancerous cells due
to anti-angiogenic properties and hence lead to cell death.
Angiogenesis inhibitors can interfere with various steps in
angiogenesis, such as the proliferation and migration of
endothelial cells and lumen formation. A possible mecha-
nism could be inhibition of protein kinases (Oikawa et al.
1992). These enzymes are implicated to play an important
role in signal transduction and are known for their effects on
angiogenesis. Genistein is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis
in vitro (Fotsis et al. 1993; Kim 2003; Su et al. 2005) and
thus could have therapeutic applications in the treatment of
chronic neovascular diseases including solid tumor growth
(Fotsis et al. 1995) and inhibition of neovascularization of
the eye by genistein has been reported (Kruse et al. 1997;
Joussen et al. 2000; Xu and Yuan 2009). Studies on the
inhibition of cell proliferation and angiogenesis by ﬂavo-
noids in six different cancer cell lines had been reported and
noted that the IC50 of active ﬂavonoids were in the low
micromolar range, physiologically available concentrations
(Fotsis et al. 1997). Isoﬂavonones (genistein, genistin,
daidzein, and biochanin A) also inhibit growth of murine
and human bladder cancer cell lines by inducing cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis, and angiogenesis (Zhou et al. 1998).
Luteolin has been found to inhibit VEGF-induced angio-
genesis;
inhibition
of
endothelial
cell
survival
and
450
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

proliferation by targeting phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
action (Bagli et al. 2004). Favot et al. (2003) suggested the
involvement of cyclin-dependent pathway in the inhibitory
effect of delphinidin on angiogenesis. During the last dec-
ade, some more novel molecular targets for the inhibition of
angiogenesis by genistein have been discovered including
tissue factor, endostatin, and angiostatin (Su et al. 2005).
Genistein may enhance the action of transforming
growth factor-b (TGF-b) (Kim et al. 1998; Sathyamoorthy
et al. 2005). This action may be a link between the effects
of genistein in a variety of chronic diseases (Barnes 1998)
including atherosclerosis and hereditary hemorrhagic tel-
angiectasia (the Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome) in which
defects in TGF-b have been characterized (Johnson et al.
1996). Schindler and Mentlein (2006) determined whether
secondary plant constituents, i.e., ﬂavonoids, tocopherols,
curcumin, and other substances regulate VEGF in human
tumor cells in vitro. It was found that the glycosylated
ﬂavonoids (i.e., naringin, a constituent of citrus fruits, and
rutin, a constituent of cranberries) induced the greatest
response to treatment at the lowest concentration in MDA
human breast cancer cells. Inhibition of VEGF release by
ﬂavonoids, tocopherols, and lovastatin in models of neo-
plastic cells suggests a novel mechanism for mammary
cancer prevention. He et al. (2011) indicate that hispidulin
targets the VEGF receptor 2-mediated PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway in endothelial cells, leading to the sup-
pression of pancreatic tumor growth and angiogenesis.
Induce apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
Apoptosis is a programed cell death to eliminate damaged
or unwanted cells. It is regulated by a variety of genes that
can either promote apoptosis or can favor cell survival in
response to internal or external stimuli. Dysregulation of
apoptosis could play a critical role in oncogenesis. Among
these genes, the tumor suppressor p53 plays a pivotal role
in controlling the cell cycle, apoptosis, genomic integrity,
and DNArepair (Bode and Dong 2004) by acting as
transactivator or as transrepressor (Ho et al. 2005). After
activation, p53 can bind to regulatory DNA sequences and
activate the expression of genes involved in cell cycle
inhibition (p21, reprimo, cyclin G1, GADD45), apoptosis
(PERP, NOXA, PUMA, p53AIP1, ASPP1/2, Fas, BAX,
PIDD) and genetic stability (p21, DDB2, MSH2, XPC)
(Carr 2000; Amin et al. 2009). EGCG also activated p53
and BAX in breast carcinoma cells (Roy et al. 2005).
Genistein induced G2/M arrest and apoptosis in human
malignant glioma cell lines by activating p53 and p21
(Schmidt et al. 2008). In addition to p53, mammalian cells
contain two closely related proteins, p63 and p73. EGCG
induces apoptosis by activating p73-dependent expression
of a subset of p53 target genes (Amin et al. 2007).
Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-rB) family of transcription
factors consists of ﬁve members, p50, p52, p65 (Rel A),
c-Rel, and Rel B, which share an N-terminal Rel homology
domain responsible for DNA binding. NF-rB is activated
by free radicals, inﬂammatory stimuli, cytokines, carcino-
gens, tumor promoters, endotoxins, c-radiation, ultraviolet
(UV) light, and X-rays and induces NF-rB target genes
important for cellular growth and transformation, sup-
pression of apoptosis, invasion, metastasis, chemoresis-
tance, radioresistance, and inﬂammation. Flavonoids may
block one or more steps in the NF-rB signaling pathway
such as inhibition of the most upstream growth factor
receptors that activate the NF-rB signaling cascade,
translocation of NF-rB to the nucleus, DNA binding of the
dimers, or interactions with the basal transcriptional
machinery (Ju et al. 2007). The NF-rB target genes inﬂu-
enced by the ﬂavonoids include inhibition of Bcl-2 and
Bclx(L), cyclin D1, matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), and
VEGF (Hastak et al. 2003; Li et al. 2006).
Flavonoids have been found to suppress activator pro-
tein-1 (AP-1) activation and modulate AP-1 target genes.
AP-1 is a group of dimeric leucine zipper proteins con-
sisting of Jun (c-Jun, JunB, JunD), Fos (c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1,
and Fra-2), Maf (c-Maf, MafB, MafA, MafG/F/K, and Nrl),
and ATF (ATF2, LRF1/ATF3, B-ATF, JDP1, JDP2) sub-
families (Shaulian and Karin 2002). These proteins form
either homo- or heterodimers and bind either to AP-1 DNA
recognition elements (50-TGAG/CTCA-30) or to cAMP
response elements (50-TGACGTCA-30) and activate their
target genes. Some of the biologic effects of AP-1 are
mediated by gene repression. AP-1-regulated genes include
important modulators of invasion and metastasis, angio-
genesis, proliferation, differentiation, and survival.
Activation of various tyrosine kinases leads to phos-
phorylation, dimerization, and nuclear localization of the
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)
proteins, binding to speciﬁc DNA elements and direct
transcription.
Constitutive
activation
of
STAT3
and
STAT5 has been implicated in multiple myelomas, lym-
phomas, leukemias, and several solid tumors. Selvendiran
et al. (2006) reported that luteolin inhibited phosphoryla-
tion of STAT3, which targeted it for proteosomal degra-
dation and inhibited the expression of cyclin D1, survivin,
Bcl-x(L), and VEGF.
Luteolin is capable of inducing anti-cancer effects by
inducing cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in oral squamous
cancer cells (Yang et al. 2008), human esophageal, lung,
liver and colon cancer cells (Zhang et al. 2008; Ju et al.
2007). Luteolin inhibited proliferation and induced apop-
tosis of prostate cancer cells in vitro and in xenografts
(Chiu and Lin 2008), with increased efﬁcacy of cisplatin in
gastric cancer cells (Wu et al. 2008). Genistein inhibited P
Ca cell growth in culture by inducing G2/M arrest and
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
451
123

apoptosis, increased the radiation efﬁcacy against prostate
cancer in cell culture and in vivo models (Lakshman et al.
2008).
Quercetin has been reported to suppress the viability of
HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner by inducing G2/M
phase cell cycle arrest and mitochondrial apoptosis through
a p53-dependent mechanism (Vidya et al. 2010). Some
characteristic changes in nuclear morphology, phosphati-
dylserine externalization, mitochondrial membrane depo-
larization, modulation of cell-cycle regulatory proteins and
NF-jB family members, upregulation of proapoptotic Bcl-2
family proteins, cytochrome C, Apaf-1 and caspases, and
downregulation of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins and sur-
viving was reported. Similarly ﬁsetin inhibited the prolif-
eration of bladder cancer cells by inducing apoptosis and
blocking cell-cycle progression in the G0/G1 phase. It
signiﬁcantly increases the expression of p53 and p21 pro-
teins, and decreases the levels of cyclin D1, cyclin A, CDK4
and CDK2, thereby contributing to cell cycle arrest. In
addition, ﬁsetin increased the expression of Bax and Bak
but decreased the levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL and subse-
quently triggered mitochondrial apoptotic pathway (Li et al.
2011a, b). Pretreatment with chrysin could increase TRAIL-
induced degradation of caspase 3, caspase 8, PARP protein.
Z-VAD- fmk, which is a pan-cascade inhibitor, could
inhibit the apoptosis enhanced by combination of chrysin
and TRAIL (Li et al. 2011a, b). 2,2 dihydroxychalcone
(DHC) and ﬁsetin, induced S and G2 phase cell-cycle arrest
in LNCaP and PC3 prostate cancer cells by downregulation
in gene expression of 75 key cell cycle (G2 and M phases)
and enhanced expression of 50 stress response gene.
Thereby, DHC and ﬁsetin induced apoptosis, but not
accelerated senescence in prostate cells (Haddad 2008). The
study on diethyl 5,7,40-trihydroxy ﬂavanone N-phenyl
hydrazone (N101-2), a synthesized naringenin derivative
exhibited cervical cancer cell growth inhibition by arresting
the cell cycle at sub-G1 phase, activating mitochondria-
emanated intrinsic and Fas-mediated extrinsic signaling
pathways, and inhibiting the PI3K/AKT pathway in CaSki
and SiHa human cervical cancer cells (Kim et al. 2012).
Summary and conclusions
Flavonoids greatly inﬂuence the cascade of immunological
events associated with the development and progression of
cancer. One has to understand the mechanism how these
ﬂavonoids get accumulated in cellular organelles and tis-
sues once they enter inside. Flavonoids have the potential
of modulatng many biological events in cancer such as
apoptosis, vascularization, cell differentiation, cell prolif-
eration, etc. A strong correlation persists between ﬂavo-
noid-induced modulation of kinases with apoptosis, cell
proliferation and tumor cell invasive behavior in vitro.
Also, some of the dietary ﬂavonoids have been known to
display in vivo anti-tumor activity and repress in vivo
angiogenesis. The cross talk between ﬂavonoids and the
key enzymes related to neoplastic cells and metastasis has
to be understood in vitro and in vivo as well, providing new
insights for ﬁghting against cancer.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors of the MS entitled ‘‘Anti-Cancer
potential of Flavonoids: Recent Trends and Future Perspectives’’
declare that they have no potential conﬂict of interest regarding
submission and publication of this manuscript.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and the source are credited.
References
Adlercreutz H (2002) Phyto-oestrogens and cancer. Lancet Oncol
3:32–40
Agullo G, Gamet-Payrastre L, Manenti S, Viala C, Re´me´sy C, Chap
H, Payrastre B (1997) Relationship between ﬂavonoid structure
and inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase: a comparison
with tyrosine kinase and protein kinase C inhibition. Biochem
Pharmacol 53(11):1649–1657
Ahmad N, Mukhtar H (2004) Cytochrome P450: a target for drug
development for skin diseases. J Investig Dermatol 123:417–425
Ahn SC, Kim GY, Kim JH, Baik SW, Han MK, Lee HJ, Moon DO,
Lee CM, Kang JH, Kim BH, Oh YH, Park YM (2004)
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, constituent of green tea, suppresses
the LPS-induced phenotypic and functional maturation of murine
dendritic cells though inhibition of mitogen-activated-protein
kinases and NF-kB. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 313:
148–155
Akiyama T, Ishida J, Nakagawa S, Ogawara H, Watanabe S, Itoh N,
Shibuya M, Fukami Y (1987) Genistein, a speciﬁc inhibitor of
tyrosine speciﬁc protein kinase. J Biol Chem 262:5592–5595
Alvarez AI, Real R, Perez M, Mendoza G, Prieto JG, Merino G (2010)
Modulation of the activity of ABC transporters (P-glycoprotein,
MRP2, BCRP) by ﬂavonoids and drug response. J Pharm Sci
99:598–617
Amin AR, Thakur VS, Paul RK, Feng GS, Qu CK, Mukhtar H,
Agarwal ML (2007) SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase inhibits p73-
dependent apoptosis and expression of a subset of p53 target
genes induced by EGCG. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:5419–
5424
Amin AR, Kucuk O, Khuri FR, Shin DM (2009) Perspectives for
cancer prevention with dietary compounds. J Clin Oncol
27(16):2712–2725
Anzenbacher P, Anzenbacherova´ E (2011) Cytochromes P450 and
metabolism of xenobiotics. Cell Mol Life Sci 58(5–6):737–747
Arai Y, Watanabe S, Kimira M, Shimoi K, Mochizuki R, Kinae N
(2000) Dietary intakes of ﬂavonols, ﬂavones and isoﬂavones by
Japanese women and the inverse correlation between quercetin
intake and plasma LDL cholesterol concentration. J Nutr 130(9):
2243–2250
Arnold RS, He J, Remo A, Ritsick D, Yin-Goen Q, Lambeth JD,
Datta MW, Young AN, Petros JA (2007) Nox1 expression
determines cellular reactive oxygen and modulates c-fos induced
452
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

growth factor, interleukin-8, and Cav-1. Am J Pathol 171(6):
2021–2032
Arts ICW (2008) A review of the epidemiological evidence on tea,
ﬂavonoids, and lung cancer. J Nutr 138:1561S–1566S
Arts IC, Hollman PC (2005) Polyphenols and disease risk in
epidemiologic studies. Am J Clin Nutr 81:317S–325S
Arts IC, Jacobs DR, Gross M, Harnack LJ, Folsom AR (2002) Dietary
catechins and cancer incidence among postmenopausal women:
the Iowa Women’s Health Study (United States). Cancer Causes
Control 13:373–382
Atkinson C, Warren RML, Sala E, Dowsett M, Dunning AM, Healey
CS, Runswick S, Day NE, Bingham SA (2004) Red clover-
derived isoﬂavones and mammographic breast density: a double-
blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Breast Cancer Res
6:R170–R179
Atmani D, Chaher N, Atmani D, Berboucha M, Debbache N,
Boudaoud H (2009) Flavonoids in human health: from structure
to biological activity. Curr Nutr Food Sci 5:225–237
Bagli E, Stefaniotou M, Morbidelli L, Ziche M, Psillas K, Murphy C,
Fotsis T (2004) Luteolin inhibits vascular endothelial growth
factor-induced angiogenesis; inhibition of endothelial cell sur-
vival
and
proliferation
by
targeting
phosphatidylinositol
30-kinase activity. Cancer Res 64:7936–7946
Balasuriya BWN, Rupasinghe HPV (2011) Plant ﬂavonoids as
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in regulation of
hypertension. Funct Foods Health Dis 5:172–188
Barkhem T, Carlsson B, Nilsson Y, Enmark E, Gustafsson JA,
Nilsson S (1998) Differential response of estrogen receptor a and
estrogen receptor b to partial estrogen agonists/antagonists. Mol
Pharmacol 54:105–112
Barnes S (1998) Phytoestrogens and breast cancer. Ballieres Clin
Endocrinol Metab 12:559–579
Bazzano LA, He J, Ogden LG, Loria CM, Vupputuri S, Myers L,
Whelton PK (2002) Fruit and vegetable intake and risk of
cardiovascular disease in US adults: the ﬁrst National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey Epidemiologic Follow-up Study.
A J Clin Nutr 76(1):93–99
Bazzoli DL, Hill S, DiSilvestro RA (2002) Soy protein antioxidant
actions in active, young adult women. Nutr Res 22:807–815
Birt DF, Hendrich S, Wang W (2001) Dietary agents in cancer
prevention:
ﬂavonoids
and
isoﬂavonoids.
Pharmacol
Ther
90:157–177
Blagosklonny MV (2001) Treatment with inhibitors of caspases, that
are substrates of drug transporters, selectively permits chemo-
therapy-induced apoptosis in multidrug-resistant cells but pro-
tects normal cells. Leukemia 15:936–941
Bobe G (2008) Flavonoid intake and risk of pancreatic cancer in
male smokers (Finland). Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
17:553–562
Boccardo F, Lunardi G, Guglielmini P, Parodi M, Murialdo R,
Schettini G, Rubagotti A (2004) Serum enterolactone levels and
the risk of breast cancer in women with palpable cysts. Eur J
Cancer 40(1):84–89
Bode AM, Dong Z (2004) Post-translational modiﬁcation of p53 in
tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 4:793–805
Bosetti C, Rossi M, McLaughlin JK, Negri E, Talamini R, Lagiou P,
Montella M, Ramazzotti V, Franceshi S, LaVecchia C (2007)
Flavonoids and the risk of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16(1):98–101
Brand W, Schutte ME, Williamson G, van Zanden JJ, Cnubben NH,
Groten JP, van Bladeren PJ, Rietjens IM (2006) Flavonoid-
mediated inhibition of intestinal ABC transporters may affect the
oral bioavailability of drugs, food-borne toxic compounds and
bioactive ingredients. Biomed Pharmacother 60:508–519
Bridges AJ (2001) Chemical inhibitors of protein kinases. Chem Rev
101:2541–2572
Brown AK, Papaemmanouil A, Bhowruth V, Bhatt A, Dover LG,
Besra GS (2007) Flavonoid inhibitors as novel antimycobacterial
agents
targeting
Rv0636,
a
putative
dehydratase
enzyme
involved in Mycobacterium tuberculosis fatty acid synthase II.
Microbiology 153:3314–3322
Brueggemeier RW, Gu X, Mobley JA, Joomprabutra S, Bhat AS,
Whetstone JL (2001) Effects of phytoestrogens and synthetic
combinatorial libraries on aromatase, estrogen biosynthesis, and
metabolism. Ann N Y Acad Sci 948:51–66
Caltagirone S, Rossi C, Poggi A, Ranalletti FO, Natali PG, Brunetti
M, Aiello FB, Piantelli M (2000) Flavonoids apigenin and
quercetin inhibit melanoma growth and metastatic potential. Int J
Cancer 87:595–600
Carr AM (2000) Cell cycle: piecing together the p53 puzzle. Science
287:1765–1766
Casagrande F, Darbon JM (2001) Effects of structurally related
ﬂavonoids on cell cycle progression of human melanoma cells:
regulation of cyclin-dependent kinases CDK2 and CDK1.
Biochem Pharmacol 61:1205–1215
Cermak R (2008) Effect of dietary ﬂavonoids on pathways involved
in drug metabolism. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 4:17–35
Cermak R, Landgraf S, Wolffram S (2004) Quercetin glucosides
inhibit glucose uptake into brush-border-membrane vesicles of
porcine jejunum. Br J Nutr 91:849–855
Chahar MK, Sharma N, Dobhal MP, Joshi YC (2011) Flavonoids: a
versatile source of anticancer drugs. Phcog Rev 5:1–12
Chiu FL, Lin JK (2008) Downregulation of androgen receptor
expression by luteolin causes inhibition of cell proliferation and
induction of apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells and
xenografts. Prostate 68:61–71
Ciolino HP, Daschner PJ, Yeh GC (1999) Dietary ﬂavonoids quercetin
and kaempferol are ligands of aryl hydrocarbon receptor that
affect CYP1A1 differentially. Biochem J 340:715–722
Clifford MN (2004) Diet-derived phenols in plasma and tissues and
their implications for health. Planta Med 12:1103–1114
Clifford MN, Brown JE (2006) Dietary ﬂavonoids and health—
broadening the perspective. In: Andersen ØM, Markham KR
(eds) Flavonoids: chemistry, biochemistry and application,
pp 319–370
Conseil G, Baubichon-Cortay H, Dayan G, Jault JM, Barron D (1998)
Flavonoids: a class of modulators with bifunctional interactions
at ATP- and steroid-binding sites on mouse P-glycoprotein. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 95:9831–9836
Cotroneo MS, Wang J, Fritz WA, Eltoum IE, Lamartiniere CA (2002)
Genistein action in the prepubertal mammary gland in a
chemoprevention model. Carcinogenesis 23:1467–1474
D’Alessandro T, Prasain J, Botting NP, Moore R, Darley-Usmar VM,
Patel RP, Barnes S (2003) Polyphenols, inﬂammatory response,
and cancer prevention: chlorination of isoﬂavones by human
neutrophils. J Nutr 133:3773S–3777S
Dai Q, Franke AA, Jin F, Shu XO, Hebert JR, Custer LJ, Cheng J,
Gao YT, Zheng W (2002) Urinary excretion of phytoestrogens
and risk of breast cancer among Chinese women in Shanghai.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 11:815–821
Dalu A, Haskell JF, Coward L, Lamartiniere CA (1998) Genistein, a
component of soy, inhibits the expression of the EGF and ErbB/
Neu receptors in the rat dorsolateral prostate. Prostate 37:36–43
Dangles O, Dufour C (2005) Flavonoids–protein interactions. In:
Andersen ØM, Markham KR (eds) Flavonoids chemistry,
biochemistry and applications. CRC Press, pp 443–469
Das DK (1994) Naturally occurring ﬂavonoids: structure, chemistry,
and high performance liquid chromatography methods for
separation and characterization. Methods Enzymol 234:410–420
De Santi C, Pietrabissa A, Mosca F, Rane A, Paciﬁci GM (2002)
Inhibition of phenol sulfotransferase (SULT1A1) by quercetin in
human adult and foetal livers. Xenobiotica 32:363–368
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
453
123

den Tonkelaar I, Keinan-Boker L, Veer PV, Arts CJ, Adlercreutz H,
Thijssen JH, Peeters PH (2001) Urinary phytoestrogens and
postmenopausal breast cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark-
ers Prev 10(3):223–228
Dhar DN (1994) The chemistry of chalcones and related compounds.
Wiley, New York
DiPietro A, Conseil G, Perez-Victoria JM, Dayan G, Baubichon-
Cortaya H, Trompiera D, Steinfels E, Jault JM, de Wet H,
Maitrejan M, Comte G, Boumendjel A, Mariotte AM, Dumontet
C, McIntosh DB, Goffeau A, Castanys S, Gamarro F, Barron D
(2002) Modulation by ﬂavonoids of cell multidrug resistance
mediated by P-glycoprotein and related ABC transporters. Cell
Mol Life Sci 59:307–322
Djuric Z, Chen G, Doerge DR, Heilbrun LK, Kucuk O (2001) Effect
of soy isoﬂavone supplementation on markers of oxidative stress
in men and women. Cancer Lett 172:1–6
Doostdar H, Burke MD, Mayer RT (2000) Bioﬂavonoids: selective
substrates and inhibitors for cytochromes P450 CYP1A and
CYP1B1. Toxicology 144:31–38
Fang SC, Hsu CL, Lin HT, Yen GC (2010) Anticancer effects of
ﬂavonoid derivatives isolated from Millettia reticulata Benth in
SK-Hep-1 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. J Agric Food
Chem 58(2):814–820
Favot L, Martin S, Keravis T, Andriantsitohaina R, Lugnier C (2003)
Involvement of cyclin-dependent pathway in the inhibitory
effect
of
delphinidin
on
angiogenesis.
Cardiovasc
Res
59:479–487
Ferguson PJ, Kurowska E, Freeman DJ, Chambers AF, Koropatnic DJ
(2004) A ﬂavonoid fraction from cranberrry extract inhibits
proliferation of human tumor cell lines. J Nutr 134(6):1529–1535
Ferreira JFS, Luthria DL, Sasaki T, Heyerick A (2010) Flavonoids
from Artemisia annua L. as antioxidants and their potential
synergism with artimisin against malaria and cancer. Molecules
15:3135–3170
Firestone GL, Sundar SN (2009) Anticancer activities of artemisinin
and its bioactive derivatives. Expert Rev Mol Med 11:1–15
Foti P, Erba D, Riso P, Spadafranca A, Criscuoli F, Testolin G (2005)
Comparison between daidzein and genistein antioxidant activity
in primary and cancer lymphocytes. Arch Biochem Biophys
433:427–431
Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, Fleischmann G, Hase T,
Montesano R, Schweigerer L (1993) Genistein, a dietary-derived
inhibitor of in vitro angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
90:2690–2694
Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, Hase T, Montesano R, Schweigerer L
(1995) Genistein, a dietary ingested isoﬂavonoid, inhibits cell
proliferation and in vitro angiogenesis. J Nutr 125:790S–797S
Fotsis T, Pepper MS, Aktas E, Breit S, Rasku S, Adlercreutz H,
Wa¨ha¨la¨ K, Montesano R, Schweigerer L (1997) Flavonoids,
dietary-derived inhibitors of cell proliferation and in vitro
angiogenesis. Cancer Res 57:2916–2921
Franco OH, Bonneux L, de Laet C, Peeters A, Steyerberg EW,
Mackenbach JP (2004) The Polymeal: a more natural, safer, and
probably tastier (than the Polypill) strategy to reduce cardiovas-
cular disease by more than 75%. BMJ 329:1447–1450
Fukuyama M, Rokutan K, Sano T, Miyake H, Shimada M, Tashiro S
(2005) Overexpression of a novel superoxide producing enzyme,
NADPH oxidase 1, in adenoma and well differentiated adeno-
carcinoma of the human colon. Cancer Lett 221(1):97–104
Galijatovic A, Otake Y, Walle UK, Walle T (2001) Induction of
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase UGT1A1 by the ﬂavonoid chrysin
in Caco-2 cells: potential role in carcinogen bioinactivation.
Pharm Res 18:374–379
Gamet-Payrastre L, Manenti S, Gratacap MP, Tulliez J, Chap H,
Payrastre B (1999) Flavonoids and the inhibition of PKC and PI
3-kinase. Gen Pharmacol 32:279–286
Garcia-Closas R, Gonzalez CA, Agudo A, Riboli E (1999) Intake of
speciﬁc carotenoids and ﬂavonoids and the risk of gastric cancer
in Spain. Cancer Causes Control 10:71–75
Gibellini L, Pinti M, Nasi M, Montagna JP, De Biasi S, Roat E,
Bertoncelli L, Cooper EL, Cossarizza A (2011) Quercetin and
cancer chemoprevention. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med
2011:591356
Giuliani C, Noguchi Y, Harii N, Napolitano G, Tatone D, Bucci I,
Piantelli M, Monaco F, Kohn LD (2008) The ﬂavonoid quercetin
regulates growth and gene expression in rat FRTL-5 thyroid
cells. Endocrinology 149(1):84–92
Goetzl MA, VanVeldhuizen PJ, Thrasher JB (2007) Effect of soy
phytoestrogens on the prostate. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis
10:216–223
Gould KS, Lister C (2005) Flavonoid functions in plants. In:
Andersen OM, Markham KR (eds) Flavonoids chemistry,
biochemistry and applications. CRC Press Taylor & Francis
Group, London, pp 397–442
Grifﬁths LA, Barrow A (1972) The fate of orally and parenterally
administered ﬂavonoids in the mammal. The signiﬁcance of
biliary excretion. Angiologica 9:30–42
Guo JY, Li X, Browning JD Jr, Rottinghaus GE, Lubahn DB,
Constantinou A, Bennink M, MacDonald RS (2004) Dietary soy
isoﬂavones and estrone protect ovariectomized ERalphaKO and
wild-type mice from carcinogen-induced colon cancer. J Nutr
134:179–182
Hackett AM (1986) The metabolism of ﬂavonoid compounds in
mammals. In: Cody V, Middleton E Jr, Harborne JB (eds) Plant
ﬂavonoids in biology and medicine: biochemical, pharmacolog-
ical, and structure–activity relationships. Alan R Liss lnc, New
York, pp 177–194
Haddad AQ (2008) The cellular and molecular properties of
ﬂavonoids in prostate cancer chemoprevention. Ph.D Thesis,
Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto
Harborne JB (ed) (1994) The ﬂavonoids: advances in research since
1986. Chapman & Hall, London
Harborne JB, Williams CA (2000) Advances in ﬂavonoid research
since 1992. Phytochemistry 55(6):481–504
Haslam E (1996) Natural polyphenols (vegetable tannins) as drugs:
possible modes of action. J Nat Prod 59:205–215
Hassan S, Mathesius U (2012) The role of ﬂavonoids in root–
rhizosphere signalling: opportunities and challenges for improv-
ing plant–microbe interactions. J Exp Bot 63(9):3429–3444
Hastak K, Gupta S, Ahmad N, Agarwal MK, Agarwal ML, Mukhtar H
(2003) Role of p53 and NF-kappaB in epigallocatechin-3-
gallateinduced apoptosis of LNCaP cells. Oncogene 22:4851–4859
Havsteen BH (2002) The biochemistry and medical signiﬁcance of
ﬂavonoids. Pharmacol Ther 96:67–202
He L, Wu Y, Lin L, Wang J, Wu Y, Chen Y, Yi Z, Liu M, Pang X
(2011) Hispidulin, a small ﬂavonoid molecule, suppresses the
angiogenesis and growth of human pancreatic cancer by
targeting vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2-mediated
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. Cancer Sci 102(1):219–225
Heinonen M, Rein D, Teresa Satue´-Gracia M, Huang S-W, Bruce-
German J, Frankel EN (1998) Effect of protein on the
antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds in a lecithin–
liposome oxidation system. J Agric Food Chem 46:917–922
Heller W, Forkmann G (1993) Biosynthesis. In: Harborne JB (ed) The
ﬂavonoids. Advances in research since 1986. Chapman and Hall
Ltd, London, pp 499–535
Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, Katan MB (1992) Content of potentially
anticinogenic ﬂavonoids of 28 vegetables and 9 fruits commonly
consumed in the Netherlands. J Agric Food Chem 40:2379–2383
Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, van de Putte B (1993a) Content of
potentially anticarcinogenic ﬂavonoids of tea infusions, wines,
and fruit juices. J Agric Food Chem 41:1242–1246
454
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

Hertog MGL, Hollman PCH, Katan MB, Kromhout D (1993b) Intake
of potentially anticarcinogenic ﬂavonoids and their determinants
in adults in the Netherlands. Nutr Cancer 20:21–29
Ho JS, Ma W, Mao DY, Benchimol S (2005) p53-dependent
transcriptional repression of c-myc is required for G1 cell cycle
arrest. Mol Cell Biol 25:7423–7431
Hodek P, Treﬁl P, Stiborova M (2002) Flavonoids: potent and
versatile biologically active compounds interacting with cyto-
chromes P450. Chem Biol Interact 139(1):1–21
Hodek P, Tepla M, Krizkova J, Sulc M, Stiborova M (2009)
Modulation of cytochrome P450 enzyme system by selected
ﬂavonoids. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 30(1):67–71
Holland B, Welch AA, Unwin ID, Buss DH, Paul AA, Southgate
DAT (1995) McCance and Widdowson’s the composition of
foods, 5th edn. Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge
Hollman PCH (2004) Absorption, bioavailability, and metabolism of
ﬂavonoids. Pharm Biol 42(S):74–83
Hollman PCH, Katan MB (1998) Absorption, metabolism, and
bioavailability of ﬂavonoids. In: Rice-Evans CA, Paker L (eds)
Flavonoids in health and disease. Marcel Dekker Inc, New York,
pp 483–522
Hollman PCH, Katan MB (1999) Dietary ﬂavonoids: intake, health
effects and bioavailability. Food Chem Toxicol 37:937
Holzbeierlein JM, McIntosh J, Thrasher JB (2005) The role of soy
phytoestrogens in prostate cancer. Curr Opin Urol 15:17–22
Ingram D, Sanders K, Kolybaba M, Lopez D (1997) Case control study
of phyto-oestrogens and breast cancer. Lancet 350:990–994
Johnson IT (2004) New approaches to the role of diet in the prevention
of cancers of the alimentary tract. Mutat Res 551(1–2):9–28
Johnson DW, Berg JN, Baldwin MA et al (1996) Mutations in the
activin receptor-like kinase I gene in hereditary haemorrhagic
telangiectasia type 2. Nat Genet 13:189–195
Johnson J, Maher P, Hanneken A (2009) The ﬂavonoid, eriodictyol,
induces long-term protection in ARPE-19 cells through its
effects on Nrf2 activation and phase II gene expression. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 50(5):2398–2406
Joussen AM, Rohrschneider K, Reichling J, Kirchhof B, Kruse FE
(2000) Treatment of corneal neovascularization with dietary
isoﬂavonoids and ﬂavonoids. Exp Eye Res 71(5):483–487
Ju W, Wang X, Shi H, Chen W, Belinsky SA, Lin Y (2007) A critical
role of luteolin-induced reactive oxygen species in blockage of
tumor necrosis factor-activated nuclear factor kappa B pathway
and sensitization of apoptosis in lung cancer cells. Mol
Pharmacol 71:1381–1388
Kameshwaran S, Suresh V, Arunachalam G, Kanthlal SK, Mohanraj M
(2012) In vitro and in vivo anticancer activity of methanolic
ﬂower extract of Tecoma stans ﬂower. Int Res J Pharm 3(3):
246–252
Kang ZC, Tsai SJ, Lee H (1999) Quercetin inhibits benzo[a]pyrene-
induced DNA adducts in human Hep G2 cells by altering
cytochrome P-450 1A1 expression. Nutr Cancer 35:175–179
Kilkkinen A, Virtamo J, Vartiainen E, Sankila R, Virtanen MJ,
Adlercreutz H, Pietinen P (2004) Serum enterolactone concen-
tration is not associated with breast cancer risk in a nested case–
control study. Int J Cancer 108(2):277–280
Kim MH (2003) Flavonoids inhibit VEGF/bFGF-induced angiogen-
esis in vitro by inhibiting the matrix-degrading proteases. J Cell
Biochem 89(3):529–538
Kim H, Peterson TG, Barnes S (1998) Mechanisms of action of the
soy isoﬂavone genistein: emerging role of its effects through
transforming growth factor beta signaling pathways. Am J Clin
Nutr 68:1418S–1425S
Kim YJ et al (2004) Superoxide anion scavenging and xanthine
oxidase inhibition of (þ)-catechin—aldehyde polycondensates.
Ampliﬁcation of the antioxidant property of (þ)-catechin by
polycondensation with aldehydes. Biomacromolecules 5:547
Kim JH, Kang JW, Kim MS, Bak Y, Park YS, Jung KY, Lim YH,
Yoon DY (2012) The apoptotic effects of the ﬂavonoid N101-2
in human cervical cancer cells. Toxicol In Vitro 26(1):67–73
Kioka M, Hosokawa N, Komano T, Hirayoshi K, Nagata K, Ueda K
(1992) Quercetin, a bioﬂavonoid, inhibits the increase of human
multidrug resistance gene (MDR1) expression caused by arse-
nite. FEBS Lett 301:307–309
Knekt P, Jarvinen R, Reunanen A, Maatela J (1996) Flavonoid intake
and coronary mortality in Finland: a cohort study. Br Med J
312:478–481
Knekt P, Kumpulainen J, Jarvinen R, Rissanen H, Heliovaara M,
Reunanen A, Hakulinen T, Aromaa A (2002) Flavonoid intake
and risk of chronic diseases. Am J Clin Nutr 76:560–568
Kroon PA, Clifford MN, Crozier A, Day AJ, Donovan JL, Manach C,
Williamson G (2004) How should we assess the effects of
exposure to dietary polyphenols in vitro? Am J Clin Nutr
80:15–21
Kruse FE, Joussen AM, Fotsis T et al (1997) Inhibition of
neovacularization of the eye by dietary factors exempliﬁed by
isoﬂavonoids. Ophthalmologie 94:152–156
Kuiper GGJM, Carlsson B, Grandien K, Enmark E, Haggblad J,
Nilsson S, Gustafsson JA (1997) Comparison of the ligand
binding speciﬁcity and transcript tissue distribution of estrogen
receptors a and b. Endocrinology 138:863–870
Kuiper GGJM, Lemmen JG, Carlsson BO, Corton JC, Safe SH, van
der Saag PT, van der Burg B, Gustafsson JA (1998) Interaction
of estrogenic chemicals and phytoestrogens with estrogen
receptor b. Endocrinology 139:4252–4263
Kumar PS, Sucheta S, Deepa VS, Selavamani P, Latha S (2008)
Antioxidant activity in some selected Indian medicinal plants.
African J Biotechnol 7(12):1826–1828
Kurisawa M, Chung JE, Kim YJ, Uyama H, Kobayashi S (2003)
Ampliﬁcation of antioxidant activity and xanthine oxidase
inhibition of catechin by enzymatic polymerization. Biomacro-
molecules 4:469–471
Lagiou P, Rossi M, Lagiou A, Tzonou A, La Vecchia C, Trichopoulos
D (2008) Flavonoid intake and liver cancer: a case–control study
in Greece. Cancer Causes Control 19(8):813–818
Lai H, Sasaki T, Singh NP, Messay A (2005) Effects of artemisinin-
tagged holotrasferrin on cancer cells. Life Sci 76:1267–1279
Lakshman M, Xu L, Ananthanarayanan V, Cooper J, Takimoto CH,
Helenowski I, Pelling JC, Bergan RC (2008) Dietary genistein
inhibits metastasis of human prostate cancer in mice. Cancer Res
68:2024–2032
Le Bail JC, Laroche T, Marre-Fournier F, Habrioux G (1998)
Aromatase and 17b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibition by
ﬂavonoids. Cancer Lett 133:101–110
Le Marchand L, Murphy SP, Hankin JH, Wilkens LR, Kolonel LN
(2000) Intake of ﬂavonoids and lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
92:154–160
Li YC (2011) Antioxidant activity of ﬂavonoids from sweet potato
vines in vitro. Adv Mater Res 236–238:2634–2638
Li Y, Kucuk O, Hussain M, Abrams J, Cher ML, Sarkar FH (2006)
Antitumor
and
antimetastatic
activities
of
docetaxel
are
enhanced by genistein through regulation of osteoprotegerin/
receptor activator of nuclear factor-B (RANK)/RANK ligand/
MMP-9 signaling in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 66:4816–4825
Li J, Cheng Y, Qu W, Sun Y, Wang Z, Wang H, Tian B (2011a)
Fisetin, a dietary ﬂavonoid, induces cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis through activation of p53 and inhibition of NF-kappa
B pathways in bladder cancer cells. Basic Clin Pharmacol
Toxicol 108(2):84–93
Li X, Wang JN, Huang JM, Xiong XK, Chen MF, Ong CN, Shen HM,
Yang XF (2011b) Chrysin promotes tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induced apop-
tosis in human cancer cell lines. Toxicol In Vitro 25(3):630–635
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
455
123

Lim SD, Sun C, Lambeth JD, Marshall F, Amin M, Chung L, Petros
JA, Arnold RS (2005) Increased Nox1 and hydrogen peroxide in
prostate cancer. Prostate 62(2):200–207
Liu SL, Lin X, Shi DY, Cheng J, Wu C, Zhang YD (2002) Reactive
oxygen species stimulated human hepatoma cell proliferation via
cross-talk between PI3-K/PKB and JNK signaling pathways.
Arch Biochem Biophys 406:173–182
Liu G, Ding L, Luo C, Yang H, Yang D, Liang G, Wang L (2006)
Protection against DNA damage and inhibition of lipid perox-
idation by ﬂavones from Eremosparton songoricum (Litv) Vass.
Res Chem Intermed 32(2):145–152
Liu EH, Qi LW, Li P (2010) Structural relationship and binding
mechanisms of ﬁve ﬂavonoids with bovine serum albumin.
Molecules 15:9092–9103
Liu PX, Gao J, Chen YJ, Long W, Shen X, Tang WS (2011)
Anticancer activity of total ﬂavonoids isolated from Xianhe
Yanling Recipe. Chin J Integr Med 17(6):459–463
Lund TD, Munson DJ, Haldy ME, Setchell KDR, Lephart ED, Handa
RJ (2004) Equol is a novel anti-androgen that inhibits prostate
growth and hormone feedback. Biol Reprod 70:1188–1195
Luo H, Daddysman MK, Rankin GO, Jiang BH, Chen YC (2010)
Kaempferol enhances cisplatin’s effect on ovarian cancer cells
through promoting apoptosis caused by down regulation of
cMyc. Cancer Cell Int 10:16
Manach C, Morand C, Demigne C, Texier O, Regerat F, Remesy C
(1997) Bioavailability of rutin and quercetin in rats. FEBS Lett
409:12–16
Marchetti F, De Santi C, Vietri M, Pietrabissa A, Spisni R, Mosca F,
Paciﬁci GM (2001) Differential inhibition of human liver and
duodenum sulphotransferase activities by quercetin, a ﬂavonoid
present in vegetables, fruit and wine. Xenobiotica 31:841–847
McCann SE, Moysich KB, Freudenheim JL, Ambrosone CB, Shields
PG (2002) The risk of breast cancer associated with dietary
lignans
differs
by
CYP17
genotype
in
women.
J
Nutr
132(10):3036–3041
McCann SE, Muti P, Vito D, Edge SB, Trevisan M, Freudenheim JL
(2004) Dietary lignan intakes and risk of pre- and postmeno-
pausal breast cancer. Int J Cancer 111(3):440–443
McRae JM, Kennedy JA (2011) Wine and grape tannin interactions
with salivary proteins and their impact on astringency: a review
of current research. Molecules 16:2348–2364
Meng X, Lee MJ, Li C, Sheng S, Zhu N, Sang S, Ho CT, Yang CS
(2001) Formation and identiﬁcation of 40-O-methyl-(-)-epigal-
locatechin in humans. Drug Metab Dispos 29:789–793
Messina MJ, Persky V, Setchell KDR, Barnes S (1994) Soy intake
and cancer risk; a review of the in vitro and in vivo data. Nutr
Cancer 21:114–131
Middleton E, Kandaswami C (1994) The impact of plant ﬂavonoids
on mammalian biology: implications for immunity, inﬂamma-
tion and cancer. In: Harborne JB (ed) The ﬂavonoids, advances
in research since 1986. Chapman & Hall, London, pp 619–645
Mitchell JH, Gardner PT, Mcphail DB, Morrice PC, Collins AR,
Duthie GG (1998) Antioxidant efﬁcacy of phytoestrogens in
chemical and biological model systems. Arch Biochem Biophys
360:142–148
Modak B, Torres R, Urzu´a A (2011) Seasonal variation of the
ﬂavonoids pinocembrin and 3-O-methylgalangin, in the surface
component mixture (resinous exudates and waxy coating) of
Heliotropium stenophyllum. J Chil Chem Soc 56(1):532–534
Molepo RS (2010) Flavonoid induction of cytochrome P450 (CYP)
in human esophageal carcinoma cells: implications for chemo-
therapy. M. Sc Thesis, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesberg
Monasterio A, Urdaci MC, Pinchuk IV et al. (2004) Flavonoids
induce apoptosis in human leukemia U937 cells through caspase-
and caspase-calpaindependent pathways. Nutr cancer 50:90–100
Moon YJ, Wang X, Morris ME (2006) Dietary ﬂavonoids: effects on
xenobiotic and carcinogen metabolism. Toxicol In Vitro 20(2):
187–210
Morris ME, Zhang S (2006) Flavonoid–drug interactions: effects of
ﬂavonoids on ABC transporters. Life Sci 78:2116–2130
Mueller SO, Simon S, Chae K, Metzler M, Korach KS (2004)
Phytoestrogens and their human metabolites show distinct
agonistic and antagonistic properties on estrogen receptor (alpha)
and ER(beta) in human cells. Toxicol Sci 81:530–531
Nakase I, Gallis B, Takatani-Nakase T, Oh S, Lacoste E, Singh NP,
Goodlett DR, Tanaka S, Futaki S, Lai H, Sasaki T (2009)
Transferrin
receptor-dependent
cytotoxicity of
artemisinin–
transferrin conjugates on prostate cancer cells and induction of
apoptosis. Cancer Lett 274:290–298
Nardini M, Cirillo E, Natella F, Scaccini C (2002) Absorption of
phenolic acids in humans after coffee consumption. J Agric Food
Chem 50:5735–5741
Neuhouser ML (2004) Dietary ﬂavonoids and cancer risk: evidence
from human population studies. Nutr Cancer 50(1):1–7
Nijeveldt R, Nood EV, Hoorn DECV, Boelens PG, Norren KV,
Leeawen PAMV (2001) Flavonoids: a review of probable
mechanisms of action and potential applications. Am J Clin
Nutr 74:418–425
Nothlings U, Murphy SP, Wilkens LR, Boeing H et al (2008) A food
pattern that is predictive of ﬂavonol intake and risk of pancreatic
cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 88(6):1653–1662
Ofer M, Wolffram S, Koggel A, Spahn-Langguth H, Langguth P (2006)
Modulation of drug transport by selected ﬂavonoids: involvement
of P-gp and OCT? Eur J Pharm Sci 25(2–3):263–271
Ogbuewu IP, Uchegbu MC, Emenalom OO, Okoli IC, Iloeje MU
(2010) Overview of the chemistry of soy isoﬂavones, potential
threats and potential therapeutic beneﬁts. Electron J Environ
Agric Food Chem 9(4):682–695
Oh S, Kim BJ, Singh NP, Lai H, Sasaki T (2009) Synthesis and anti-
cancer activity of covalent conjugates of artemisinin and a
transferrin-receptor targeting peptide. Cancer Lett 274:33–39
Ohta T, Nakatsugi S, Watanabe K, Kawamori T, Ishikawa F,
Morotomi M, Sugie S, Toda T, Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K
(2000) Inhibitory effects of biﬁdo-bacterium-fermented soy milk
on PhIP-induced rat mammary carcinogenesis, with partial
contribution of its component isoﬂavaones. Carcinogenesis
21:937–941
Oikawa T, Shimamura M, Ashino H, Nakamura O, Kanayasu T,
Morita I, Murota S (1992) Inhibition of angiogenesis by
staurosporine, a potent protein kinase inhibitor. J Antibiot
(Tokyo) 45:1155–1160
Okushio K, Matsumoto N, Kohri T, Suzuki M, Nanjo F, Hara Y
(1996) Absorption of tea catechins into rat portal vein. Biol
Pharm Bull 19:326–329
Olthof MR, Hollman PC, Vree TB, Katan MB (2000) Bioavailabil-
ities of quercetin-3-glucoside and quercetin-40-glucoside do not
differ in humans. J Nutr 130:1200–1203
Olthof MR, Hollman PC, Buijsman MN, van Amelsvoort JM, Katan
MB (2003) Chlorogenic acid, quercetin-3-rutinoside and black
tea phenols are extensively metabolized in humans. J Nutr
133:1806–1814
Ørgaard A, Jensen L (2008) The effects of soy isoﬂavones on obesity.
Exp Biol Med 233(9):1066–1080
Orsˇolic´ N, Benkovic´ V, Lisicˇic´ D, Ðikic´ D, Erhardt J, Knezˇevic´ AH
(2010) Protective effects of propolis and related polyphenolic/
ﬂavonoid compounds against toxicity induced by irinotecan.
Med Oncol 27(4):1346–1358
Parr AJ, Bolwell GP (2000) Phenols in the plant and in man. The
potential for possible nutritional enhancement of the diet by
modifying phenolic content or composition. J Sci Food Agric
80:985–1012
456
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

Pascual-Teresa D, Santos-Buelga S, Rivas-Gonzalo JC (2000)
Quantitative analysis of ﬂavan-3-ols in Spanish foodstuffs and
beverages. J Agric Food Chem 48:5331–5337
Passamonti S, Terdoslavich M, Franca R, Vanzo A, Tramer F, Braidot
E, Petrussa E, Vianello A (2009) Bioavailability of ﬂavonoids: a
review of their membrane transport and the function of
bilitranslocase in animal and plant organisms. Curr Drug Metab
10:369–394
Patel MJ (2008) A review of potential health beneﬁts of ﬂavonoids.
Lethbridge Undergrad Res J 3(2)
Peng W, Kuo SM (2003) Flavonoid structure affects the inhibition of
lipid peroxidation in caco-2 intestinal cells at physiological
concentrations. J Nutr 133(7):2184–2187
Peng Y, Li QW, Jian L (2011) Antitumor activity of Scutellaria
baicalensis Georgi total ﬂavonoids on mice bearing U14 cervical
carcinoma. Afr J Biotechnol 10(82):19167–19175
Perez JL, Jayaprakasha GK, Cadena A, Martinez E, Hassan A, Patil
BS (2010) In vivo induction of phase II detoxifying enzymes,
glutathione transferase and quinone reductase by citrus triterp-
enoids. BMC Complement Altern Med 10:51
Perez-Victoria JM, Chiquero MJ, Conseil G, Dayan G, Di Pietro A,
Barron D, Castanys S, Gamarro F (1999) Correlation between
the afﬁnity of ﬂavonoids binding to the cytosolic site of
Leishmania tropica multidrug transporter and their efﬁciency
to revert parasite resistance to daunomycin. Biochemistry
38:1736–1743
Perez-Vizcaino F, Duarte J, Jimenez R, Santos-Buelga C, Osuna A
(2009) Antihypertensive effects of the ﬂavonoid quercetin.
Pharmacol Rep 61(1):67–75
Peterson J, Lagiou P, Samoli E, Lagiou A, Katsouyanni K et al (2003)
Flavonoid intake and breast cancer risk: a case control study in
Greece. Br J Cancer 89(7):1255–1259
Petri N, Tannergren C, Holst B, Mellon FA, Bao Y, Plumb GW,
Bacon J, O’Leary KA, Kroon PA, Knutson L, Forsell P, Eriksson
T, Lennernas H, Williamson G (2003) Absorption/metabolism of
sulforaphane and quercetin, and regulation of phase II enzymes,
in human jejunum in vivo. Drug Metab Dispos 31:805–813
Phan TA, Yu XM, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H (2011) Antiprolif-
erative effect of chrysin on anaplastic thyroid cancer. J Surg Res
170(1):84–88
Pietinen P, Stumpf K, Ma¨nnisto¨ S, Kataja V, Uusitupa M, Adlercreutz
H (2001) Serum enterolactone and risk of breast cancer: a case–
control study in Eastern Finland. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 10:33
Pike ACW, Brzozowski AM, Hubbard RE, Bonn T, Thorsell AG,
Engstrom O, Ljunggren J, Gustafsson JA˚ , Carlquist M (1999)
Structure of the ligand-binding domain of oestrogen receptor
beta in the presence of a partial agonist and a full antagonist.
EMBO J 18:4608–4618
Poli G, Leonarduzzi G, Biasi F, Chiarpotto E (2004) Oxidative stress
and cell signalling. Curr Med Chem 11(9):1163–1182
Qin Y, Li Z, Chen Y, Hui H, Sun Y, Yang H, Lu Na, Guo Q (2012)
III-10, a newly synthesized ﬂavonoid, induced differentiation of
human U937 leukemia cells via PKCd activation. Eur J Pharm
Sci 45(5):648–656
Rahman S, Salehin F, Iqbal A (2011) In vitro antioxidant and
anticancer activity of young Zingiber ofﬁcinale against human
breast carcinoma cell lines. BMC Complement Altern Med 11:76
Ravichandiran V, Ahamed HN, Nirmala S (2011) Natural ﬂavonoids
and lung cancer. Pharmacie Globale 6(2):1–9
Renaud S, de Lorgeril M (1992) Wine, alcohol, platelets, and the
French paradox for coronary heart disease. Lancet 339:1523–1526
Robards K, Antolovich M (1997) Analytical chemistry of fruit
bioﬂavonoids. Analyst 122:11R–34R
Rodriguez-Proteau R, Mata JE, Miranda CL, Fan Y, Brown JJ, Buhler
DR (2006) Plant polyphenols and multidrug resistance: effects of
dietary ﬂavonoids on drug transporters in Caco-2 and MDCKII-
MDR1 cell transport models. Xenobiotica 36(1):41–58
Romanouskaya TV, Grinev VV (2009) Cytotoxic effect of ﬂavonoids
on leukemia cells and normal cells of human blood. Bull Exp
Biol Med 148(1):57–59
Rossi M, Garavello W, Talamini R, Negri E, Bosetti C, Dal Maso L,
Lagiou P, Tavani A, Polesel J, Barzan L, Ramazzotti V,
Franceschi S, Vecchia C (2007) Flavonoids and the risk of oral
and pharyngeal cancer: a case–control study from Italy. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16:1621–1625
Rossi M, Bosetti C, Negri E, Lagiou P, La Vecchia C (2010)
Flavonoids, proanthocyanidins, and cancer risk: a network of
case–control studies from Italy. Nutr Cancer 62(7):871–877
Roy AM, Baliga MS, Katiyar SK (2005) Epigallocatechin-3-gallate
induces apoptosis in estrogen receptor-negative human breast
carcinoma cells via modulation in protein expression of p53 and
Bax and caspase-3 activation. Mol Cancer Ther 4:81–90
Rudrabhatla P, Rajasekharan R (2005) Functional characterization of
peanut serine/threonine/tyrosine protein kinase: molecular dock-
ing and inhibition kinetics with tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Biochemistry 43(38):12123–12132
Ruela-de-Sousa RR, Fuhler GM, Blom N, Ferreira CV, Aoyama H,
Peppelenbosch MP (2010) Cytotoxicity of apigenin on leukemia
cell lines: implications for prevention and therapy. Cell Death
Dis 1(1):19
Russo GL (2007) Ins and outs of dietary phytochemicals in cancer
chemoprevention. Biochem Pharmacol 74(4):533–544
Saewan N, Koysomboon S, Chantrapromma K (2011) Anti-tyrosinase
and anti-cancer activities of ﬂavonoids from Blumea balsamifera
DC. J Med Plants Res 5(6):1018–1025
Samanta A, Das G, Das SK (2011) Roles of ﬂavonoids in plants. Int J
Pharm Sci Technol 6(1):12–35
Sandhar HK, Kumar B, Prasher S, Tiwari P, Salhan M, Sharma P
(2011) A review of phytochemistry and pharmacology of
ﬂavonoids. Int Pharm Sci 1:25–41
Sathyamoorthy N, Gilsdorf JS, Wang TT (2005) Differential effect of
genistein on transforming growth factor beta1 expression in
normal and malignant mammary epithelial cells. Anticancer Res
18(4A):2449–2453
Sato T, Koike L, Miyata Y, Hirata M, Mimaki Y, Sashida Y, Yano M,
Ito A (2002) Inhibition of activator protein-1 binding activity and
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase pathway by nobelitin, a polyhydroxy
ﬂavonoid, results in augmentation of TIMP-1 production and
suppression of production of matrix metalloproteinases-1 and -9 in
human ﬁbrosarcoma HT-1080 cells. Cancer Res 62:1025–1029
Scalbert A, Williamson G (2000) Dietary intake and bioavailability of
polyphenols. J Nutr 130:S2073–S2085
Scheline RR (1991) Handbook of mammalian metabolism of plant
compounds. CRC Press, Boca Raton
Schindler R, Mentlein R (2006) Flavonoids and vitamin E reduce the
release of the angiogenic peptide vascular endothelial growth
factor from human tumor cells. J Nutr 136(6):1477–1482
Schmidt F, Knobbe CB, Frank B, Wolburg H, Weller M (2008) The
topoisomerase II inhibitor, genistein, induces G2/M arrest and
apoptosis in human malignant glioma cell lines. Oncol Rep
19:1061–1066
Schroeter H, Spencer JP, Rice-Evans C, Williams RJ (2001)
Flavonoids protect neurons from oxidized low-density-lipopro-
tein-induced apoptosis involving c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK),
c-Jun and caspase-3. Biochem J 358:547–557
Schroeter H, Boyd C, Spencer JP, Williams RJ, Cadenas E, Rice-
Evans C (2002) MAPK signaling in neurodegeneration: inﬂuences
of ﬂavonoids and of nitric oxide. Neurobiol Aging 23:861–880
Seelinger G, Merfort I, Wolﬂe U, Schempp CM (2008) Anti-
carcinogenic
effects
of
the
ﬂavonoid
luteolin.
Molecules
13:2628–2651
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
457
123

Selvendiran K, Koga H, Ueno T, Yoshida T, Maeyama M, Torimura
T, Yano H, Kojiro M, Sata M (2006) Luteolin promotes
degradation in signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
in human hepatoma cells: an implication for the antitumor
potential of ﬂavonoids. Cancer Res 66(9):4826–4834
SeuﬁAM, Ibrahim SS, Elmaghraby TK, Hafez EE (2009) Preventive
effect of the ﬂavonoid, quercetin, on hepatic cancer in rats via
oxidant/antioxidant activity: molecular and histological evi-
dences. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 28:80
Shapiro AB, Ling V (1997) Effects of quercetin on Hoechst 33342
transport by puriﬁed and reconstituted P-glycoprotein. Biochem
Pharmacol 53:587–596
Shaulian E, Karin M (2002) AP-1 as a regulator of cell life and death.
Nat Cell Biol 4:E131–E136
Sivonˇova´ M, Zˇitnˇanova´ I, Hora´kova´ L, Sˇtrosova´ M, Muchova´ J,
Balgavy´ P, Dobrota D, Dˇ uracˇkova´ Z (2006) The combined effect
of pycnogenol with ascorbic acid and trolox on the oxidation of
lipids and proteins. Gen Physiol Biophys 25:379–396
So FV, Guthrie N, Chambers AF, Carroll KK (1997) Inhibition of
proliferation of estrogen receptor positive MCF-7 human breast
cancer cells by ﬂavonoids in the presence and absence of excess
estrogen. Cancer Lett 112:127–133
Spencer CM et al (1988) Polyphenol complexation—some thoughts
and observations. Phytochemistry 27:2397–2409
Stefani ED, Boffetta P, Deneo-Pellegrini H, Mendilaharsu M,
Carzoglio JC, Ronco A, Olivera L (1999a) Dietary antioxidants
and lung cancer risk: a case–control study in Uruguay. Nutr
Cancer 34:100–110
Stefani ED, Ronco A, Mendilaharsu M, Deneo-Pellegrini H (1999b)
Diet and risk of cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract-II. Nutr
Oral Oncol 35:22–26
Stevens JF, Page JE (2004) Xanthohumol and related prenylﬂavo-
noids from hops and beer: to your good health. Phytochemistry
65:1317–1330
Su SJ, Yeh TM, Chuang WJ, Ho CL, Chang KL, Cheng HL, Liu HS,
Cheng HL, Hsu PY, Chow NH (2005) The novel targets for anti-
angiogenesis of genistein on human cells. Biochem Pharmacol
69:307–318
Sugatani J, Yamakawa K, Tonda E, Nishitani S, Yoshinari K, Degawa
M, Abe I, Noguchi H, Miwa M (2004) The induction of human
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 mediated through a distal
enhancer module by ﬂavonoids and xenobiotics. Biochem
Pharmacol 67:989–1000
Tang NP, Zhou B, Wang B, Yu RB, Ma J (2009) Flavonoids intake
and risk of lung cancer: a meta-analysis. Jpn J Clin Oncol
39(6):352–359
Tosetti F, Ferrari N, De Flora S, Albini A (2002) Angioprevention’:
angiogenesis is a common and key target for cancer chemopre-
ventive agents. FASEB J 16(1):2–14
Tsao AS, Edward SK, Hong WK (2004) Chemoprevention of cancer.
CA Cancer J Clin 54:150–180
Valko M, Izakovic M, Mazur M, Rhodes CJ, Telser J (2004) Role of
oxygen radicals in DNA damage and cancer incidence. Mol Cell
Biochem 266(1):37–56
van der Logt EM, Roelofs HM, Nagengast FM, Peters WH (2003)
Induction of rat hepatic and intestinal UDP-glucuronosyltrans-
ferases by naturally occurring dietary anticarcinogens. Carcino-
genesis 24:1651–1656
Ververidis F, Trantas E, Douglas C, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G,
Panopoulos N (2007) Biotechnology of ﬂavonoids and other
phenylpropanoid-derived natural products. Part I: chemical
diversity, impacts on plant biology and human health. Biotech-
nol J 2(10):1214–1234
Vidya PR, Senthil MR, Maitreyi S, Ramalingam K, Karunagaran D,
Nagini S (2010) The ﬂavonoid quercetin induces cell cycle arrest
and mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in human cervical cancer
(HeLa) cells through p53 induction and NF-jB inhibition. Eur J
Pharmacol 649(1–3):84–91
Vietri M, Vaglini F, Pietrabissa A, Spisni R, Mosca F, Paciﬁci GM
(2002) Sulfation of R(–)-apomorphine in the human liver and
duodenum, and its inhibition by mefenamic acid, salicylic acid
and quercetin. Xenobiotica 32:587–594
von Moltke LL, Weemhoff JL, Bedir E, Khan IA, Harmatz JS,
Goldman P, Greenblatt DJ (2004) Inhibition of human cyto-
chromes P450 by components of Ginkgo biloba. J Pharm
Pharmacol 56:1039–1044
Wagner H, Farkas L (1975) Synthesis of ﬂavonoids. In: Harborne JB,
Mabry TJ, Mabry H (eds) The ﬂavonoids. Part I. Academic
Press, New York, pp 127–213
Walle UK, Walle T (2002) Induction of human UDP-glucuronosyl-
transferase
UGT1A1
by
ﬂavonoids-structural
requirements.
Drug Metab Dispos 30:564–569
Walle T, Walle UK, Halushka PV (2001) Carbon dioxide is the major
metabolite of quercetin in humans. J Nutr 131:2648–2652
Wallstrom P, Wirfalt E, Janzon L, Mattisson I, Elmstahl S, Johansson
U, Berglund G (2000) Fruit and vegetable consumption in
relation to risk factors for cancer: a report from the Malmo Diet
and Cancer Study. Public Health Nutr 3:263–271
Wang B, Zhang X (2012) Inhibitory effects of Broccolini leaf
ﬂavonoids on human cancer cells. Scanning 34(1):1–5
Wei H, Tye L, Bresnick E, Birt DF (1990) Inhibitory effect of
apigenin, a plant ﬂavonoid, on epidermal ornithine decarboxyl-
ase and skin tumor promotion in mice. Cancer Res 50:499–502
Wei H, Bowen R, Cai Q, Barnes S, Wang Y (1995) Antioxidant and
antipromotional effects of the soybean isoﬂavone genistein. Exp
Biol Med 208(1):124–130
Wiegand H, Boesch-Saadatmandi C, Regos I, Treutter D, Wolffram
S, Rimbach G (2009) Effects of quercetin and catechin on
hepatic glutathione-S transferase (GST), NAD(P)H quinone
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), and antioxidant enzyme activity
levels in rats. Nutr Cancer 61:717–722
Williams RJ, Spencer JPE, Rice-Evans C (2004) Flavonoids:
antioxidants or signalling molecules? Free Radic Biol Med
36(7):838–849
Wilson RT, Wang J, Chinchilli V, Richie JP, Virtamo J, Moore LE,
Albanes D (2009) Fish, vitamin D and ﬂavonoids in relation to
renal cell cancer among smokers. Am J Epidemiol 170(6):717–729
Wiseman H, Halliwell B (1996) Damage to DNA by reactive oxygen
and nitrogen species: role in inﬂammatory disease and progres-
sion to cancer. Biochem J 313:17–29
Wiseman H, O’Reilly J, Lim P, Garnett AP, Huang WC, Sanders
TAB (1998) Antioxidant properties of the isoﬂavone phytoes-
trogen functional ingredient in soy products. In: Sadler M,
Saltmarsh M (eds) Functional foods, the consumer, the products
and the evidence. Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,
pp 80–86
Wiseman H, O’Reilly JD, Adlercreutz H, Mallet AI, Bowey EA,
Rowland IR, Sanders TAB (2000) Isoﬂavone phytoestrogens
consumed in soy decrease F2-isoprostane concentrations and
increase resistance of low-density lipoprotein to oxidation in
humans. Am J Clin Nutr 72:395–400
Wiseman H, Casey K, Clarke DB, Barnes KA, Bowey E (2002)
Isoﬂavone aglycone and glucoconjugate content of high- and
low-soy UK foods used in nutritional studies. J Agric Food
Chem 50:1404–1410
Wu B, Zhang Q, Shen W, Zhu J (2008) Antiproliferative and
chemosensitizing effects of luteolin on human gastric cancer
AGS cell line. Mol Cell Biochem 313:125–132
Xi J, Guo R (2008) Interactions of puerarin with micelles: pKa shifts
and thermodynamics. J Solut Chem 37(1):107–118
Xiao CW (2008) Health effects of soy protein and isoﬂavones in
humans. J Nutr 138:1244S–1249S
458
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
123

Xiao ZP, Peng ZY, Peng MJ, Yan WB, Ouyang YZ, Zhu HL (2011)
Flavonoids health beneﬁts and their molecular mechanism. Med
Chem 11(2):169–177
Xu WH, Yuan ZL (2009) Inhibition of experimental alkali-induced
corneal neovascularization in rabbits by using genistein. Int J
Ophthalmol (7)
Yang EB, Zhang K, Cheng LY, Mack P (1998) Butein, a speciﬁc
protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
mun 245:435–438
Yang ZF, Poon RTP, Liu Y, Lau CK et al (2006) High doses of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor PTK787 enhance the efﬁcacy of
ischemic hypoxia for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma:
dual effects on cancer cell and angiogenesis. Mol Cancer Ther
5:2261–2270
Yang SF, Yang WE, Chang HR, Chu SC, Hsieh YS (2008) Luteolin
induces apoptosis in oral squamous cancer cells. J Dent Res
87:401–406
Yoshizumi M, Tsuchiya K, Suzaki Y, Kirima K, Kyaw M, Moon JH,
Terao J, Tamaki T (2002) Quercetin glucuronide prevents
VSMC hypertrophy by angiotensin II via the inhibition of JNK
and AP-1 signaling pathway. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
293:1458–1465
Young JF, Nielsen SE, Haraldsdottir J, Daneshvar B, Lauridsen ST,
Knuthsen P, Crozier A, Sandstro¨m B, Dragsted LO (1999) Effect
of fruit juice intake on urinary quercetin excretion and
biomarkers of antioxidative status. Am J Clin Nutr 69:87–94
Zaman MS, Shahryari V, Deng G, Thamminana S, Saini S et al
(2012) Up-regulation of microRNA-21 correlates with lower
kidney cancer survival. PLoSONE 7(2):e31060
Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Adlercreutz H, Shore RE, Koenig KL, Kato I,
Arslan AA, Toniolo P (2004) Circulating enterolactone and risk
of breast cancer: a prospective study in New York. Br J Cancer
91(1):99–105
Zhang Q, Zhao XH, Wang ZJ (2008) Flavones and ﬂavonols exert
cytotoxic effects on a human oesophageal adenocarcinoma cell
line (OE33) by causing G2/M arrest and inducing apoptosis.
Food Chem Toxicol 46:2042–2053
Zhou JR, Mukherjee P, Gugger ET et al (1998) Inhibition of murine
bladder tumorigenesis by soy isoﬂavones via alterations in the
cell cycle, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Cancer Res 58:5231–
5238
Zi XL, Grasso AW, Kung HJ, Agarwal R (1998) A ﬂavonoid
antioxidant, silymarin, inhibits activation of erbB1 signaling and
induces cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, G1 arrest and
anticarcinogenic effects in human prostate carcinoma DU145
cells. Cancer Res 58:1920–1929
3 Biotech (2013) 3:439–459
459
123
