Academic Editor: Ronaldo
Vagner Thomatieli‑Santos
Received: 26 December 2025
Revised: 21 January 2026
Accepted: 30 January 2026
Published: 2 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Review
Exploring the Role of Food and Food‑Related Compounds in
Parkinson’s Disease
Ilaria Trezzi 1,*
, Gianluca Rizzo 1,*
, Francesca Giampieri 2
, Maurizio Battino 2
and Luciana Baroni 1
1
Scientific Society for Vegetarian Nutrition‑SSNV, 30171 Venice, Italy; luciana.baroni@scienzavegetariana.it
2
Department of Clinical Specialistic and Odontostomatological Sciences, University Polytechnic of Marche,
60131 Ancona, Italy; f.giampieri@univpm.it (F.G.); m.a.battino@univpm.it (M.B.)
*
Correspondence: info@ilariatrezzi.com (I.T.); drgianlucarizzo@gmail.com (G.R.)
Abstract
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease, charac‑
terized by motor and non‑motor symptoms that significantly impact patients’ quality of
life. Beyond pharmacological treatments, nutrition plays a crucial role in the prevention
and management of the disease. Nutritional interventions represent a pivotal strategy for
improving clinical outcomes and quality of life in PD patients, addressing issues such as
delayed gastric emptying, constipation, weight loss, malnutrition, and chewing or swal‑
lowing difficulties. A plant‑based diet is particularly suitable for such patients, due to
its high fiber content which can enhance gastrointestinal motility, thereby improving lev‑
odopa bioavailability, and potentially ameliorateing PD symptoms. For this reason, along‑
side neurological support, PD patients should receive nutritional counseling. Moreover,
food choices can influence the risk of developing the disease: a high consumption of dairy
products has been associated with an increased risk of PD; conversely, many plant foods
could elicit neuroprotective effects thanks to beneficial phytochemicals such as flavonoids,
especially anthocyanins. Furthermore, a moderate coffee consumption could reduce PD
risk and progression. The aim of this review is to explore the impact of dietary factors on
the risk and progression of PD, evaluate the therapeutic potential of specific foods and di‑
etary patterns in disease management, and highlight the clinical significance of nutritional
interventions, specifically focusing on plant‑based diets.
Keywords:
Parkinson’s Disease;
diet;
food;
plant‑based diet;
neuroprotection;
gut–brain axis
1. Introduction
Diet represents a key modifiable environmental factor that influences the onset and
progression of neurodegenerative diseases. The Western diet, rich in saturated fats and
refined sugars, is associated in humans with impaired memory function [1–3], linking this
dietary pattern to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) [4]. Nutrition can also influence the risk of de‑
veloping Parkinson’s Disease (PD) [5], the second most common neurodegenerative disor‑
der after AD. It affects 2–3% of the population over 65 years of age, with a higher prevalence
in North America, South America, and Europe [6]. PD is caused by the degeneration of
dopaminergic neurons located in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of the mesen‑
cephalon. Neuroprotective approaches focus on slowing or arresting the progressive loss
of dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc and the associated motor and non‑motor symptoms
of PD. Neuroprotective strategies aim to reduce oxidative stress, inhibit apoptosis, stabilize
Foods 2026, 15, 514
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
2 of 28
mitochondrial function, and prevent α‑synuclein aggregation. Most cases are considered
sporadic, caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors that promote the
neurodegenerative process. The most important non‑modifiable risk factors for develop‑
ing PD are age, followed by sex and ethnicity [7]. Among modifiable risk factors, diet
represents a pivotal one that can contribute to neuroprotection [5]. Food can either be pro‑
tective or increase the risk of developing PD. α‑synuclein is a small protein of unknown
biological function that is prone to aggregate into insoluble compounds, resulting in neu‑
ronal toxicity. Aggregated α‑synuclein in the form of Lewy bodies is the neuropathological
hallmark of PD. According to Braak’s theory, α‑synuclein aggregates can propagate in a
stereotyped manner from the gut to the brain, following a precise scheme [8]. One hypothe‑
sis is that α‑synuclein fibrils can be transmitted from cell to cell via a “prion‑like” spreading
mechanism [9]. In support of this hypothesis, evidence shows that a truncal vagotomy (the
surgical resection of the vagus nerve) performed on a cohort of Danish patients was asso‑
ciated with a reduced risk of PD [10]. The potential pathway of α‑synuclein spread from
the enteric nervous system to the brain, modulated by dietary factors, is summarized in
Figure 1.
Figure 1. Braak’s Hypothesis: Dietary Impact on Gut–Brain Axis and α‑Synuclein. Images provided
by Servier Medical Art (https://smart.servier.com, accessed on 21 December 2025), licensed under
CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, accessed on 21 December 2025).
The diagram illustrates how diet can influence disease progression. An unhealthy
diet (high in saturated fats and processed foods) can promote gut dysbiosis and in‑
crease intestinal permeability (“leaky gut”), triggering neuroinflammation and the mis‑
folding/aggregation of α‑synuclein in the enteric nervous system. These aggregates can
be retrogradely transported to the central nervous system via the vagus nerve.
Conversely, epidemiological and mechanistic evidence indicates that dietary patterns
rich in plant‑based foods are associated with a reduced risk of PD onset and slower pro‑
gression, thanks to a high content of antioxidants, polyphenols, and unsaturated fatty acids
with anti‑inflammatory properties and beneficial effects on the gut microbiota [11]. Accord‑
ingly, it is hypothesized that a healthy, plant‑based diet can protect the intestinal barrier,
modulate the microbiota, and exert neuroprotective effects, potentially slowing down the
neurodegenerative process.
Nevertheless, although most evidence indicates that plant‑rich diets might be protec‑
tive, there is currently no conclusive evidence to recommend a specific dietary pattern for
PD prevention; only large, long‑term randomized controlled trials can clarify the role of
nutrition. Controversies regarding nutrition in PD are mainly due to a focus on individual
nutrients, which often lead to inconclusive results, as well as small sample sizes, short du‑
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
3 of 28
rations, and heterogeneity in interventions and outcomes [12]. Moreover, diet can play a
fundamental role in the management of PD motor and non‑motor symptoms, both at early
and advanced stages of the disease. This review aims to evaluate the impact of specific nu‑
tritional factors on PD risk modulation and to assess the efficacy of various dietary patterns
in optimizing symptom management. In particular, this review will focus on dietary risk
factors such as meat, seafood, dairy products, and saturated fat intake, as well as protective
factors like flavonoids, coffee, and nicotine in Solanaceae. A separate section is dedicated to
toxicants, specifically pesticides found in animal‑derived foods, while another highlights
the importance of maintaining urate levels higher than average to prevent PD.
2. Methods
We conducted a comprehensive search on PubMed and Google Scholar databases
from inception to 28 October 2025 to identify original studies. The search strategy fo‑
cused on common risk factors for Parkinson’s Disease, specifically dietary components and
lifestyle habits. Key search terms included: ‘Parkinson’, ‘plant‑based diet’, ‘vegan diet’,
‘risk factors’, ‘meat’, ‘fish’, ‘seafood’, ‘dairy’, ‘milk’, ‘galactose’, ‘pesticides’, ‘beans’, ‘Vi‑
cia faba’, ‘Solanaceae’, ‘Mucuna pruriens’, ‘polyphenols’, ‘antioxidants’, ‘coffee’, ‘tea’, ‘plant
foods’, ‘smoking’, ‘tobacco’, ‘nicotine’, ‘fats’, ‘urate’, ‘dietary levodopa’, and ‘dietary dopa’.
Inclusion criteria were restricted to original articles in English involving humans or in vitro
models. Animal studies were excluded, in alignment with recent recommendations regard‑
ing human‑relevant methodologies in this field [13]. Following duplicate removal, articles
were screened by title and abstract; final eligibility was determined after full‑text review.
Additionally, the reference lists of selected articles were manually screened to identify fur‑
ther relevant studies. A narrative synthesis of the primary findings is presented.
3. Meat and Its Derivatives
Some studies have highlighted that frequent consumption of red meat is associated
with an increased risk of developing PD [14,15]. Although results are not entirely consis‑
tent [16], meat, especially red meat, contains various compounds that might trigger neu‑
rodegeneration. Red and processed meats (such as cured meat or corned beef) are rich in
saturated fats, which have been linked to an increased risk of PD [17–19]. Furthermore,
meat processing and cooking may result in toxic compounds such as heterocyclic amines
(HCAs) [20]. HCAs have been demonstrated to be mutagenic [21] and to exert neurotoxic
effects on in vitro dopaminergic neurons [22]. Another interesting hypothesis linking meat
consumption to PD is that vertebrates contain α‑synuclein in their muscle tissue [23].
However, since many people consume meat while only a small fraction develop PD,
it is unlikely that meat consumption represents an independent cause of the disease [24].
Other factors, such as genetic, epigenetic, inflammation, and aging, likely induce dietary
α‑synuclein to enter the host and initiate the disease. In accordance with the “leaky gut”
hypothesis, age‑related increases in intestinal permeability facilitate the translocation of
bacteria and microbial‑derived products; this process is thought to play a pivotal role
in the prion‑like propagation of α‑synuclein aggregates. Furthermore, low fiber intake
affects the intestinal barrier and enhances α‑synuclein transmigration. PD is often asso‑
ciated with an altered microbiome, which is prone to releasing inflammatory products
that can enhance oxidative stress, potentially triggering α‑synuclein accumulation in the
enteric nervous system (ENS). Bacterial inflammatory products, particularly lipopolysac‑
charides (LPS), trigger systemic inflammation (mediated by TNF‑α, IL‑1β and, IL‑6) that
promotes blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption and the consequent spread of inflamma‑
tion to the brain [25]. The gut microbiota of PD patients is often characterized by a deple‑
tion of Prevotella, known for its fiber‑degrading action, and a concomitant enrichment of
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
4 of 28
Enterobacteriaceae. Reduced Prevotella abundance has been associated with increased gut
permeability, which may facilitate α‑synuclein aggregation within the enteric nervous sys‑
tem [26]. Long‑term fiber consumption is associated with enhanced levels of Prevotella,
suggesting that a plant‑based diet may be beneficial for PD patients. Prevotella is not the
only genus affected; Faecalibacterium, Blautia, Coprococcus, and Lachnospiraceae are typically
decreased, while other genera are increased (e.g., Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Akkerman‑
sia, Ruminococcaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and Christensenellaceae) [27]. Consequently, PD
patients exhibit a distinctive gut microbiome composition compared to healthy individu‑
als. Beyond the neuroprotective properties of phytonutrients, plant‑based dietary patterns
can induce favorable modulations in the gut microbiota to counteract PD pathogenesis [28].
Several mechanisms are hypothesized to drive the initiation and perpetuation of neurode‑
generation in PD. Notably, the gut‑to‑brain translocation of α‑synuclein represents a key
pathological pathway, although it requires further empirical validation.
4. Seafood and Heavy Metals
Omega‑3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n‑3 PUFAs), such as alpha‑linolenic acid (ALA),
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are essential components
of the central nervous system that maintain neuronal membrane fluidity and signaling [29].
These fatty acids can attenuate neuroinflammation by inhibiting microglial activity and
upregulating neuroprotective astrocytic pathways through the secretion of neurotrophic
factors [30–32]. n‑3 PUFAs are primarily found in fatty fish (salmon, sardines, herring, an‑
chovies, tuna) but also in plant foods like flaxseeds, chia seeds, walnuts, and microalgae.
Prospective studies using fish oils, which are rich in n‑3 PUFAs, have shown that their
intake is associated with a decreased risk of developing PD [31,33]. Emerging evidence
indicates that the neuroprotective effects of n‑3 PUFAs result from combined mechanisms:
inhibition of pro‑inflammatory cytokines (TNF‑α, IL‑1β, IL‑6) [34], rescue of mitochon‑
drial function, and reduction in oxidative damage [35]. Specifically, DHA (a very‑long‑
chain omega‑3 fatty acid) can increase dopamine synthesis by phosphorylating tyrosine
hydroxylase [36].
Nevertheless, fatty fish and derived oils are often susceptible to contamination by
environmental pollutants, notably heavy metals and persistent organic pollutants. Long‑
term exposure to certain heavy metals, such as mercury (Hg), cadmium (Cd), and lead
(Pb), can induce neurotoxicity even at low concentrations [37].
In particular, Hg and
Pb contribute to PD onset and progression, often acting synergistically with manganese
(Mn) and copper (Cu) [38].
Metals like Cd, Cu and Hg have a high affinity for the
dopamine‑ 2 receptor [39], specifically binding to free sulfhydryl (‑SH) groups with an an‑
tagonist effect. Other metals like Mn, Cd and Cu can increase presynaptic α‑synuclein
aggregation [40]. Heavy metals can also impair blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability,
thereby promoting neurodegeneration [41,42].
In light of these toxicological concerns, sourcing dietary n‑3 PUFAs from plant‑based
alternatives represents a valuable strategy. Plant‑based sources include DHA (from mi‑
croalgae) and ALA (found in flaxseeds, chia seeds, and walnuts) which can be endoge‑
nously converted to EPA and DHA [43]. These plant‑based sources can provide neuro‑
protective fatty acids free from environmental contaminants, offering a safer nutritional
strategy for PD prevention.
5. Dairy Products
The strongest dietary association with an increased risk of PD is the consumption of
milk and dairy products [44]. Five large prospective studies have confirmed this associa‑
tion, independent of vitamin D or calcium intake [45–48]. A meta‑analysis of these studies
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
5 of 28
revealed a dose–response relationship between dairy intake and PD [49]. Data from two
large prospective studies, including the Harvard Nurses’ Health Study, found a positive
association between dairy intake and PD [44]. The exact mechanisms through which dairy
products lead to neurodegeneration remain elusive. Some authors attribute this to pesti‑
cide contamination [50,51]; evidence suggests that PD motor symptoms typically appear af‑
ter a critical threshold of 70–80% loss of dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc. A post‑mortem
study from the Honolulu‑Asia Aging Study revealed a positive association between SN
neuron loss and milk intake, even after excluding PD and Lewy Body Dementia (LBD)
cases. Brains of subjects with the highest milk consumption had higher levels of heptachlor
epoxide. It has been suggested that neurodegeneration may stem from potential milk con‑
tamination with organochlorine pesticide which are fat‑soluble [52]. Indeed, reports of
pollutants in milk worldwide highlight the need for regular product screening [50,53–55].
However, this hypothesis is challenged by the fact that skimmed milk, which contains less
fat and fewer pesticides, has the same effect as other dairy products [56]. Another hypoth‑
esis is that dairy may contain traces of α‑synuclein, though no confirmation yet exists [57].
Alternatively, high milk consumption provides galactose which, at doses above 100 mg/kg
(roughly two glasses of milk perday), can be neurotoxic. SNpc dopaminergic neurons ex‑
hibit enhanced vulnerability to oxidative stress, particularly when induced by galactose.
Indeed, galactose is a hexose sugar capable of inducing brain aging [58]. Other cohort
studies suggest that increased PD risk may be linked to the urate‑lowering effects of dairy
products [59], as urate is involved in neuroprotection [60]. The exact mechanisms through
which dairy products increase PD risk require further investigation.
6. Dietary Fat Intake
Dietary fat consumption is hypothesized to contribute to PD pathogenesis through
exacerbated oxidative stress, particularly involving high levels of saturated fatty acids.
Neuronal membranes are rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids and highly vulnerable to free
radicals, which can lead to a peroxidation cascade and neuronal death. It is speculated
that saturated fats may alter polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism and membrane lipid
composition [61]. The lipid profile of neuronal membranes is a fundamental factor in de‑
termining cellular vulnerability to oxidative damage [62]. Saturated fatty acids are linked
to chronic inflammation and oxidative stress [63]. Additionally, pesticides can modulate
PD risk via fat intake.
Evidence suggests that individuals with low polyunsaturated or a high saturated fatty
acid intake are more vulnerable to striatal neuron damage caused by pesticides, thereby in‑
creasing PD risk [18]. Previous findings on the association between dietary fat and PD are
inconsistent and fail to demonstrate a clear link for total fatty acids [64,65]. While some
studies link PD to total fat, cholesterol, and saturated fats [17], others find a protective
effect from high polyunsaturated fatty acid intake [47,65,66]. Despite these inconsisten‑
cies [65,67], elevated consumption of saturated fatty acids appears associated with an in‑
creased risk of PD onset. In a large 2003 prospective study, this correlation was found only
in men, though it was not statistically significant [61]. Other studies have shown similar
correlations [18,62]; a recent prospective study on a large Swedish cohort demonstrated
that high saturated fat intake was associated with increased PD risk. This association was
not confirmed for total, monounsaturated, or polyunsaturated fat intake [19].
In conclusion, while further research is needed, dietary fat composition likely influ‑
ences the risk of PD. The link between saturated fats, cholesterol, and cardiovascular dis‑
eases is well established. It is probable that high saturated fatty acid intake contributes
to an increased risk of PD as well. Therefore, reducing saturated fat intake in favor of
polyunsaturated fatty acids may benefit overall health and promote longevity through po‑
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
6 of 28
tential neuroprotective effects. Pending definitive evidence, a plant‑based dietary pattern
offers significant benefits due to the absence of cholesterol, lower saturated fats and higher
concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids compared to conventional diets.
7. Pesticides
One of the most frequent non‑motor symptoms in PD is constipation, which may de‑
velop years before the appearance of motor symptoms and the diagnosis of PD. A reduc‑
tion in daily bowel movements is predictive of developing PD [68]. PD patients tend to
have a lower water intake, but constipation itself could also lead to PD. It can be spec‑
ulated that constipation may increase PD risk due to the prolonged retention of feces,
leading to greater absorption of neurotoxicants [69]. As a matter of fact, pesticides have
been linked to PD, although not all agents used in agriculture have been assessed yet.
Most studies focus on occupational exposure compared to dietary exposure. It is well‑
known that people living in rural areas, who are more exposed to organophosphates,
have a higher risk of developing PD [51]. There appears to be a positive association be‑
tween the duration of pesticide exposure and the risk of developing PD [70]. The main
pesticides associated with PD include paraquat, rotenone, and several organochlorines.
Organochlorines include dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and insecticides such
as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) [71,72]. PCBs are synthetic organic pollutants
that were widely used in the past in industrial applications and have now been banned by
many countries for health reasons. DDT, a synthetic insecticide previously employed for
agricultural applications and the control of vector‑borne diseases like malaria and typhus,
is now prohibited in numerous jurisdictions due to its environmental persistence and po‑
tential toxicity. Although most of these chemicals were banned decades ago, they persist
in the environment and contaminate the food chain, accumulating in the fatty tissue of
animals and humans. Beyond their established role in carcinogenesis, environmental pes‑
ticides have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of PD [73].
While pesticides are toxic because they may cause DNA mutations that increase sus‑
ceptibility to diseases such as PD [74], they may play a more direct role in destroying
dopaminergic neurons by inducing mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation and epige‑
netic methylation [75]. A key feature of dopaminergic neurons in the basal ganglia circuit
is their reliance on intracellular calcium levels to sustain spontaneous activity: pesticides
may interfere with this homeostasis leading to neurodegeneration [75], and may also in‑
crease the risk of developing PD through an alteration of the gut microbiome [76].
The majority of pesticides are found in animal products such as fish, meat, and fish
oils, but also eggs and dairy, because many of them are fat‑soluble; conversely, the lowest
levels of contamination are found in plant foods [77,78]. Nowadays, farm animals (origi‑
nally herbivores) are often fed with slaughterhouse by‑products that increase their content
of industrial chemicals. For example, tetrahydroisoquinoline is mainly found in cheese,
and dioxin also contaminates butter and eggs [79]. Therefore, eating a plant‑based diet
can confer protection against pesticides and pollutants in general [80].
Unfortunately, many PD‑associated toxicant chemicals are environmentally persis‑
tent and can also be found in drinking water supplies, especially in rural areas [81]. Be‑
yond occupational exposure where the use of personal protective equipment may reduce
the risk of exposure to toxic compounds, a healthy diet rich in plant foods, antioxidants,
and phytochemicals, might be of great importance for the general population as a preven‑
tive strategy for many diseases, including PD.
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
7 of 28
8. Urate Levels
Uric acid (UA), the end product of purine metabolism in humans, has been associated
with PD by many studies. Low blood UA levels have been associated with an increased risk
of developing PD, as well as with promoting its progression and severity. This association
is strong and highly reproducible. Low UA levels also correlate with some non‑motor PD
symptoms such as neurocognitive dysfunction, fatigue, and sleep disorders [82,83]. How‑
ever, the biological mechanisms behind these associations are still elusive. Understanding
the nature of this link is fundamental, as it may provide insights into the pathogenesis and
eligible treatments for PD. It is supposed that low UA levels predispose individuals to ox‑
idative stress, which may trigger dopaminergic neuron degeneration [84]. According to
this theory, treatments that increase UA levels should be protective against PD and slow
down disease progression. Unfortunately, a recent clinical trial aimed at raising UA in PD
failed to show any benefit [85].
Although the main hypothesis is that low UA levels predispose to oxidative stress
and subsequent neurodegeneration, reverse causality cannot be excluded, i.e., that it is PD
itself that reduces UA levels. For this reason, numerous prospective studies have been per‑
formed and they all demonstrated an inverse relationship between low UA levels and PD;
however, a reverse association could not be entirely excluded because the disease begins
decades before the appearance of motor symptoms [84]. Mendelian randomization studies
have also detected a relationship between low UA levels and PD, but a causal link could
not be definitively ascertained. These epidemiological studies could not determine the di‑
rection of causation. Many publications have highlighted the antioxidant properties of UA,
similar to those of vitamin C [86]. It chelates metals, including iron, which can be toxic to
dopaminergic neurons when in excess [87,88]. It was also investigated whether neurons
are more exposed to UA, and it was found that UA levels in the brain are much lower than
in plasma. Little UA is produced in the brain, and plasma UA does not readily cross the
blood–brain barrier (BBB) [89]. Some researchers have analyzed UA levels in post‑mortem
human brains and found a slight but non‑significant reduction in PD patients [90]. Never‑
theless, these results must be carefully evaluated, because UA levels degrade rapidly once
blood flow to the brain is interrupted [84]. In conclusion, the brain does not produce UA
and is not exposed to high UA levels.
Normally, UA levels fluctuate during the day, and consequently, are highly variable
in the same individual. They also depend on different factors, including age, sex, body
mass, physical activity, food and medications [91]. Diet significantly affects UA levels, as
almost all foods contain purines from DNA, RNA, and their metabolites, which are mainly
metabolized into UA in the gut and the liver. Some foods increase UA levels more than
others, such as meat, fructose, and alcohol [92–94]. Other foods can lower UA levels, such
as milk, although the mechanisms are not fully understood. Perhaps, the link between
milk consumption and PD risk may stand in its UA lowering properties. In fact, milk
has an acute UA‑lowering effect [95]: drinking cow’s milk lowers UA levels within hours,
whereas drinking soy milk increases UA levels. The consumption of soy products results in
different UA concentrations, with the highest levels of UA after soy milk intake, followed
by soybean and soy powder intake [96].
High levels of UA, especially above 9 mg/dL, have been associated with a 22% in‑
creased risk of gout over five years, but when UA levels are below 7 mg/dL, the risk drops
to 0.1% [97]. Besides gout, high blood UA levels have been associated with an increased
risk of other conditions, such as hypertension, cardiovascular, and kidney diseases. Con‑
versely, low UA levels have also been associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD), multiple sclerosis (MS), cancer, and stroke [98]. Although there is no spe‑
cific UA target recommended for PD prevention, evidence suggests that maintaining UA
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
8 of 28
blood concentrations within the upper physiological range (between 6 and 7 mg/dL) may
exert neuroprotective effects on the central nervous system (CNS) while minimizing the
risk of developing gout [60].
Dairy consumption may explain the differences between meat eaters, fish eaters, lacto‑
ovo‑vegetarians and vegans. It is known that dairy products lower UA levels, probably
because of their low purine content and the higher elimination of UA due to their protein
content [95]. Results from the EPIC‑Oxford study showed that vegans exhibited the highest
UA serum levels compared to meat eaters, fish eaters, and lacto‑ovo‑vegetarians (mean UA
levels in men: vegans 6.12 mg/dL; lacto‑ovo‑vegetarians 5.4 mg/dL; fish eaters 5.5 mg/dL;
meat eaters 5.7 mg/dL; mean UA levels in women: vegans 4.3 mg/dL; lacto‑ovo‑vegetarians
4.1 mg/dL; fish eaters 4 mg/dL; meat eaters 4.2 mg/dL). This result was particularly evident
among men. In contrast, lacto‑ovo‑vegetarians and fish eaters (excluding meat) had the
lowest serum uric acid concentrations [99]. Vegans exhibited higher UA levels, likely due
to their avoidance of dairy products. The lower content of calcium in a vegan diet might
also contribute to explaining lower UA concentrations in some contexts. In line with the
findings from the EPIC‑Oxford study and various cross‑sectional analyses, dietary calcium
intake is inversely associated with UA levels [99,100]. Calcium supplementation was not
associated with a reduction in UA concentration in a randomized controlled trial, but in
that study, the mean calcium intake was higher compared to the average intake of calcium
in vegans [101]. It is possible that calcium supplementation in people with lower calcium
intakes, like vegans, would result in a reduction in UA concentration [99]. It is moreover
possible that the consumption of soy products in vegans might explain higher UA levels,
because plant purines might have a different effect on UA concentrations.
In summary, adherence to a vegan dietary pattern may maintain serum UA concentra‑
tion within an optimal range, high enough to exert a neuroprotective effect, yet sufficiently
controlled to mitigate the risk of metabolic comorbidities such as gout and cardiovascular
disorders. Adherents to a plant‑based dietary pattern are likely to maintain optimal UA
concentrations, which may contribute to enhanced longevity and a reduced risk of age‑
related neurodegeneration. Further studies are needed to confirm these results and assess
differences between men and women.
9. Flavonoids
Flavonoid compounds found in various plant‑derived foods exhibit significant antiox‑
idant and neuroprotective activities, contributing to the mitigation of neurodegenerative
processes. Since α‑synuclein misfolding and aggregation are key pathogenic processes
in PD, different flavonoid compounds have been tested to identify which ones could in‑
hibit α‑synuclein fibril folding and aggregation. It was found that a variety of flavonoids
(including flavones, flavonols, flavanones, isoflavones, dihydroflavonols, catechins, and
anthraquinones) can inhibit α‑synuclein fibrillation, and some were also able to disag‑
gregate preformed fibrils [102]. In particular, flavonoids form non‑covalent interactions
with α‑synuclein, restricting its conformational transition to β‑sheet‑rich fibrillar struc‑
tures and stabilizing monomeric or oligomeric forms [103]. Some flavonoids, such as
baicalein, also form covalent interactions with α‑synuclein, further preventing fibril for‑
mation and promoting disaggregation [104]. α‑synuclein plays a role in neurodegenera‑
tion through different mechanisms, including mitochondrial dysfunction; the possibility
of preventing its aggregation and oligomerization is a promising strategy against neurode‑
generation. Flavonoids are plant‑derived phenolic compounds found in a variety of plant
foods and beverages, including vegetables, fruits, nuts, grains, and black and green tea.
Over 8000 flavonoid compounds have been identified to date, categorized into six ma‑
jor subgroups: flavones, flavanones, flavanols, flavonols, isoflavones, and anthocyanins.
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
9 of 28
Flavonoids are typically consumed as glycosides, which are broken down by intestinal
enzymes and the gut microbiota, releasing aglycones that are absorbed by intestinal cells.
Aglycones are further metabolized in the liver and intestine, and their metabolites are quite
rapidly excreted. Flavonoids have low bioavailability because they are poorly absorbed
and rapidly metabolized and excreted, but they can bind α‑synuclein soluble monomers
and oligomers within the intestinal lumen and stabilize them. Among neuroprotective
flavonoids, epigallocatechin‑3‑gallate has been shown to protect against dopaminergic de‑
generation [105]. The most studied flavonoid in PD is baicalein, isolated from the roots of
Scutellaria baicalensis and Scutellaria lateriflora, which has antioxidant, anti‑inflammatory,
and neuroprotective properties against PD. Baicalein can directly increase dopamine lev‑
els, and reduce the amount of misfolded α‑synuclein [106,107]. The synergistic interaction
between baicalein and levodopa can reduce the adverse effects associated with high lev‑
odopa doses [108].
Naringin‑7‑O‑glycoside, a major flavanone abundant in Citrus species, exhibits strong
neuroprotective effects in PD by modulating oxidative and inflammatory pathways. Be‑
yond its antioxidant capacity, naringin may further support neurorestoration by enhanc‑
ing dopamine synthesis and preserving dopaminergic integrity [109]. Another neuropro‑
tective flavonoid is kaempferol, found mainly in citrus fruits, strawberries, apples, beans,
broccoli, onions, and tea. It exerts its beneficial effect by modulating pro‑inflammatory sig‑
naling pathways, reducing reactive oxygen species (ROS), and modulating brain‑derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [110]. A study by Han et al. found that kaempferol can pre‑
vent dopaminergic neuron degeneration by inhibiting lipid peroxidation‑induced mito‑
chondrial damage, offering a potentially novel therapeutic approach for PD [111]. In addi‑
tion, it has been shown that kaempferol and its metabolites can directly reduce α‑synuclein
aggregation [112].
Anthocyanins represent the most significant flavonoid subclass as‑
sociated with a reduced risk of PD. These phytochemicals are found in high concentra‑
tions in various berries, including blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum), cherry (Prunus avium), blue‑
berry (Vaccinium spp.), mulberry (Morus spp.), and black elderberry (Sambucus nigra) [113].
Anthocyanins include: cyanidin, proanthocyanidin, delphinidin, malvidin, pelargonidin,
and petunidin.
Extracts rich in anthocyanins can elicit greater neuroprotective effects
than other polyphenols. They can ameliorate mitochondrial function, increase antioxi‑
dant effects by scavenging ROS, reduce membrane damage, and rescue dopaminergic neu‑
rons [113]. Notably, some cohort data suggest a more pronounced protective effect in men;
however, it is unclear if this indicates sexual dimorphism in neuroprotection, as stratified
analyses of specific flavonoid subclasses have yielded inconsistent results regarding sex‑
specific differences [114].
Although epidemiological studies have shown an inverse relationship between
flavonoid intake and the incidence of chronic diseases, including neurodegenerative disor‑
ders, little is known about the exact mechanisms through which they exert their benefits.
The main hypothesis is that they counteract oxidative stress by scavenging radicals and
through metal chelation, although their direct contribution may be relatively low because
most circulating flavonoids are metabolites with reduced antioxidant properties [115]. An
alternative hypothesis proposes that these phytochemicals can modulate specific intracel‑
lular signaling cascades, a hypothesis consistent with the documented bioactivity of var‑
ious flavonoid‑derived metabolites in neuroprotection [116]. Some flavonoids, like cur‑
cumin and kaempferol, can exert their beneficial role through epigenetic effects such as
DNA methylation, histone modifications, and increasing non‑coding RNAs [117]. Addi‑
tionally, a significant factor is the capacity of flavonoids to promote gut microbiota home‑
ostasis. Intestinal microbiota metabolizes flavonoids, increasing their bioavailability; in
turn, phytochemicals modulate the taxonomic composition and functional structure of the
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
10 of 28
gut microbiota [118]. Flavonoids are thought to have properties similar to those of pre‑
biotics, as they feed gut commensal bacteria [118]. Metabolites of prebiotic flavonoids,
such as short‑chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (propionate, acetate, and butyrate), can reduce
gut inflammation by enhancing epithelial barrier integrity [119]. Flavonoids are typically
transformed into bioactive metabolites by the gut microbiota and, for this reason, their
bioavailability is determined by their catabolism. After portal translocation, xenobiotic
biotransformation occurs in the liver before they can reach the bloodstream as phenolic
metabolites [119]. Anthocyanins have shown neuroprotective properties thanks to gut mi‑
crobiota modifications, with consequent modified tryptophan metabolism and the gener‑
ation of kynurenic acid, a neuroprotective compound [120]. Also, catechins are able to
modify the gut microbiota, reducing the number of pathogenic bacteria such as Helicobac‑
ter pylori, Escherichia coli, and Listeria monocytogenes and increasing the number of beneficial
strains such as Actinobacteria and Verrucomicrobia [121].
A plant‑based diet rich in flavonoids can be beneficial in PD by increasing dopamine
levels and reducing ROS and α‑synuclein aggregation, with consequent motor improve‑
ment. Further studies are needed to clarify the bioavailability, safety and effective doses
of flavonoids [122].
10. Coffee
Coffee is the most commonly consumed beverage worldwide, with well‑known psy‑
chostimulant effects thanks to the presence of caffeine (1,3,7‑trimethylxanthine), a natural
alkaloid with bioactive properties. The majority of coffee beverages derive from Coffea
arabica (Arabica) and Coffea canephora (Robusta) species, which differ in caffeine content,
with Robusta beans containing the highest levels. Coffee’s beneficial effects can also derive
from other bioactive compounds with antioxidant properties such as phenolic compounds
(e.g., chlorogenic acids), diterpenes (cafestol and kahweol), nicotinic acid (Vitamin B3), and
other secondary metabolites [123]. Drinking coffee regularly can reduce the risk of heart,
vascular and liver diseases, and it can also improve asthma symptoms. Moreover, regular
coffee consumption appears to be associated with a reduced severity of some neurode‑
generative disorders [124]. Different prospective studies have demonstrated that drinking
coffee is associated with a 50% reduction in the risk of developing PD [125]. Similar re‑
sults have also been confirmed by the EPIC4PD study [126]. Caffeine intake may also slow
down disease progression, especially when combined with physical activity [127,128]. PD
patients who consume coffee or caffeinated tea have a 50% reduced risk of all‑cause mortal‑
ity [125]. A meta‑analysis of 13 studies involving 901,764 participants found a non‑linear
association between coffee consumption and PD risk, with maximum protective effects
observed at about three cups per day [129].
Caffeine is an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist; these receptors are densely located
on dopaminergic neurons. The activation of these receptors induces neural excitotoxicity
with consequent neuronal death. By antagonizing this receptor, caffeine could play a neu‑
roprotective role, reducing hypercalcemia‑related damage and inflammation [130]. Some
alkaloids, like caffeine, can inhibit α‑synuclein aggregation, preventing dopaminergic neu‑
ron degeneration [131]. Other compounds, like chlorogenic acid, can reduce dopaminer‑
gic neuron loss [64]. Diterpenes, like kahweol and cafestol, can promote neuroprotection
through their antioxidant activity [132]. Moreover, coffee consumption can regulate the
gut microbiota by promoting the growth of anti‑inflammatory Bifidobacterium and decreas‑
ing negative strains like Clostridium spp. and Escherichia coli [133]. Coffee can be benefi‑
cial for cognition as well: neuropsychological research has shown that coffee drinking im‑
proves cognitive performance in elderly people with metabolic syndrome [134]. Moreover,
coffee consumption can also positively affect mood, as shown in a cross‑sectional study
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
11 of 28
conducted on 196 PD patients [135]. Regarding the beneficial effects of coffee consump‑
tion on motor PD symptoms, a study conducted on 284 patients with de novo PD found a
negative correlation with tremor severity, but only in male patients [136]. A randomized
controlled trial conducted for 6 weeks on 61 PD patients by Postuma et al. found that reg‑
ular caffeine consumption (200 mg twice a day, equivalent to four cups of coffee/day or
six cups of green tea/day) was associated with improved motor skills, as assessed by the
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale III (UPDRS‑III) [137]. In contrast, a more recent
multi‑center randomized controlled trial conducted over 6–18 months on 121 PD patients,
found that regular caffeine consumption (200 mg twice a day) was not associated with
significant motor improvement [138].
In summary, coffee consumption seems to be protective against the development of
PD and has many health benefits, including the promotion of a more beneficial gut micro‑
biota. Coffee may also be beneficial for cognitive function and mood; however, no sus‑
tained benefit has been observed regarding motor symptoms in PD patients, likely due to
its short‑term effects, which wear off too rapidly. For this reason, regular coffee consump‑
tion cannot be recommended as part of symptomatic therapy in PD.
11. Nicotine and Other Components of Edible Solanaceae and Tobacco
Previous studies have shown that smoking can protect against PD. A meta‑analysis
found that ever‑smokers had a 41% lower risk of developing PD compared to never
smokers, and that current smokers had a 58% risk reduction. A dose‑dependent re‑
lationship was also found, with higher smoking exposure linked to a greater risk re‑
duction [139].
A case–control study found that passive smoking was also associated
with a 66% reduction in PD risk, suggesting that smoke exposure itself, rather than the
act of smoking, is protective [140]. In summary, multiple studies have demonstrated
a 30–60% reduction in PD risk among smokers compared to non‑smokers. This ap‑
pears to be a dose‑dependent association, where higher cumulative smoking exposure
was associated with a further decrease in risk [141]. The exact mechanisms through which
smoking could be protective against PD are not completely clarified, as tobacco is het‑
erogeneous in its chemical composition [142]. Tobacco can inhibit monoamine oxidase
(MAO), which causes an enhancement of dopaminergic neurotransmission [143]. The in‑
hibition of MAO‑B also reduces ROS and consequently displays an antioxidant protective
effect [144]. Other studies have focused on the role played by nicotine in eliciting neuropro‑
tective effects on dopaminergic neurons [145]. Nicotine and hydroquinone, another com‑
pound contained in smoke, can inhibit α‑synuclein aggregation by stabilizing the solu‑
ble oligomeric form of the protein [146].
It has been well established that smoking is harmful, since it is associated with an in‑
creased risk of many chronic diseases, including cardiovascular diseases and cancer; this
negative effect far outweighs its neuroprotective benefits against PD. For this reason, to‑
bacco has been studied to identify potential neuroprotective components that can also be
found in food. In particular, nicotine has also been found in the Solanaceae family, including
edible fruits and tubers such as peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, and eggplants [147], athough
the amount of nicotine absorbed from these foods is lower than that obtained through ac‑
tive smoking. Nicotine has also been detected in the toenails of non‑smokers, albeit to a
lesser extent than in smokers [148]. This suggests that nicotine is absorbed through the
daily diet, and indeed, an inverse association has been observed between PD and the con‑
sumption of Solanaceae vegetables [147]. Fresh edible Solanaceae contain measurable nico‑
tine levels (2–7 mcg/kg), although these are significantly lower than the amount found in
a single cigarette (~1 mg). Nicotine has also been found in black and green teas with a vari‑
able content, which in some cases is higher than that detected in edible Solanaceae. The av‑
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
12 of 28
erage daily dietary intake of nicotine was estimated at 1.4 mcg/day, reaching 2.25 mcg/day
at the 95th percentile [149]. Nicotine receptors are highly saturable, and a small amount
of nicotine is sufficient to reach its effect [150]. Peppers (Capsicum annuum) have the high‑
est amount of nicotine among edible Solanaceae (102.1 mcg/kg). Eating them two to four
times a week could confer an over 30% increase in protection against PD. The effects of
eating nicotine‑containing foods were more evident in non‑smokers than in smokers, as
the nicotine from smoke would mask the dietary benefits [147]. The contribution of di‑
etary nicotine intake is still significant when compared to passive and active smoking, and
this could explain why diets rich in edible Solanaceae, like the Mediterranean diet, could be
protective against PD.
Besides nicotine, other Solanaceae components from pepper may be preventive against
PD: anatabine is another alkaloid exerting anti‑inflammatory properties and a poten‑
tially neuroprotective action. When compared to nicotine, anatabine was found to have
a longer half‑life, lower toxicity, and a higher anti‑inflammatory effect [151]. Capsi‑
noids found in peppers (including capsaicinoids found in spicy peppers) could increase
midbrain dopaminergic neuron survival [152]. Other components found in Solanaceae
fruits, such as lycopene, vitamin C, and vitamin A, are unlikely to explain the protective
effects of these foods against PD. This highlights the importance of phytochemical compo‑
nents like anatabine and capsaicinoids in PD prevention, which need to be addressed in
further studies.
All these findings raised the question of whether nightshade vegetables could help
in treating PD symptoms. Results from clinical trials and case studies have demonstrated
that nicotine was capable of improving PD symptoms (observed in 5 out of 10 studies).
The reason for these mixed results was due to variations in the mode of administration
(patch, gum, intravenous), dosing, treatment timing and duration. For this reason, there
are doubts regarding a direct beneficial effect of nicotine on motor PD symptoms [153].
Further studies are needed to strengthen causal inferences about the role of edible
Solanaceae in PD prevention and to test the efficacy of these foods in PD treatment. How‑
ever, considering that Solanaceae edible fruits and tubers are healthy and tasty, they offer
more benefits than potential risks; thus, it is advisable to include them regularly in the diet.
12. Dietary Patterns and Parkinson’s Disease Risk
Observational studies have associated some dietary patterns and specific food groups
with various aspects of PD, including its risk, age of onset, progression, symptom severity,
and mortality rates, although randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on nutritional interven‑
tion in PD are scarce. Nutritional interventions can potentially interfere with multiple
disease mechanisms and they might modify the disease course. Moreover, a proactive
management of dietary habits can empower PD patients to take control of an aspect of
their care, improving their quality of life and influencing symptoms management.
Listed below is the current evidence on dietary pattern in PD:
12.1. Mediterranean Diets
Mediterranean diets (MeDi) are predominantly composed of plant foods. They in‑
clude a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, legumes, unsaturated fatty acids (es‑
pecially from olive oil), nuts, seeds, and fish or seafood. They also allow for a moderate
consumption of poultry and wine while limiting red and processed meats, refined grains,
sugar, and saturated fats. This dietary pattern is associated with many health benefits, as it
improves metabolic and cardiovascular health and reduces inflammation [154]. A reduced
PD risk, a later age of onset, and fewer PD prodromal symptoms have been reported in pa‑
tients following a MeDi, suggesting that this kind of diet might be protective [155]. Its
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
13 of 28
protective effects stem from the content of foods with anti‑inflammatory and antioxidant
properties, such as phytochemicals (including polyphenols), omega‑3 fatty acids, and fiber,
which are beneficial to the gut microbiome [155]. Despite this evidence, randomized con‑
trolled trials (RCTs) are limited. A similar dietary pattern is the Japanese one, which is
mainly plant‑based, and contains high amounts of fruits, vegetables, and fish. In a case–
control study, this pattern was found to be protective against PD [156].
12.2. Ketogenic Diets
A ketogenic diet (KD) is a high‑fat, low‑carbohydrate diet that generates ketone bod‑
ies such as beta‑hydroxybutyrate, which can be used by the brain as an energy source.
This mechanism may bypass a bioenergetic deficit in PD, where damaged neurons cannot
efficiently use glucose as a source of energy [157]. It is hypotesized that ketone bodies
ameliorate mitochondrial function [158]. Research on the effects of ketogenic therapy in
PD is still in its early stages. RCTs on ketogenic diets in PD patients are very scarce and
heterogeneous, with no conclusive results [159]. Some studies show little benefit on some
motor and non‑motor PD symptoms [160,161].
12.3. MIND (Mediterranean‑DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay) Diet
The MIND was designed to protect against neurodegeneration and integrates ele‑
ments of the MeDi and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH). This dietary
pattern is highly plant‑based, emphasizing the consumption of green leafy vegetables and
berries, and has been associated with a reduced risk of all‑cause mortality [162], and cog‑
nitive decline [163]. A reduced risk of PD has been reported with this diet [164], although
this association was more substantial in the female subgroup. One study found the MIND
diet to be more protective against PD than the MeDi [165]. However, the impact of the
MIND diet on PD symptoms, progression, and PD‑associated cognitive decline has yet to
be assessed through interventional studies.
12.4. Vegetarian (Lacto‑Ovo‑Vegetarian and Vegan) Diets
Vegetarian diets have been associated with a reduced risk of all‑cause mortality, in‑
cluding PD, especially in younger populations. Data from the Adventist Health Study‑2
cohort showed that vegetarian diets are associated with lower all‑cause mortality, espe‑
cially for cardiovascular disease and cancer [166]. Previous epidemiological studies have
also shown that predominantly vegetarian cultures have lower rates of PD [167]. A UK
Biobank analysis identified an association between a healthy plant‑based diet and a re‑
duced risk of PD, whereas an unhealthy plant‑based diet was linked to an increased risk
of PD [168]. A prospective cohort study performed on the UK biobank showed a reduced
risk of AD and PD with increased physical activity, especially when combined with a plant‑
based diet [169]. A small trial on PD patients following a vegetarian diet showed improve‑
ment in UPDRS Part III scores [170]. During the 20th century, populations in East Asia
and sub‑Saharan Africa consuming an almost vegan diet were found to be at decreased
risk of PD compared with US and European populations. It has been proposed that such
diets may provide protection from PD by boosting mitochondrial function through an en‑
hanced expression of Parkin and PINK1 in the SN [171]. A prospective study that analyzed
the association between different dietary patterns and the risk of developing PD found that
subjects with a high intake of fruits, vegetables, legumes, whole grains and nuts, paired
with a low intake of saturated fat, may be protected against PD [172]. A small pilot study
has also demonstrated that plant‑based diets are beneficial for PD, especially in the man‑
agement of the disease. In fact, in this study, PD patients on a plant‑based diet demon‑
strated a significant improvement in motor performance, as evidenced by the UPDRS III
total score and the modified H&Y Staging Scale [173].
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
14 of 28
Evidence suggests that plant‑based patterns seem to be protective against PD and can
also reduce disease severity. In addition, they carry many other health benefits, such as a
reduction in the risk of other chronic disorders, particularly cardiovascular and cerebrovas‑
cular ones. Larger high‑quality randomized controlled trials are warranted to define which
dietary pattern is most beneficial in preventing PD.
Figure 2 illustrates the proposed dietary and pathophysiological mechanisms under‑
lying Parkinson’s Disease pathology.
Figure 2. Proposed dietary mechanisms contributing to Parkinson’s Disease Pathology.
13. Foods Containing Dopamine and Levodopa
Some plant foods contain dopamine. For example, Cavendish bananas contain be‑
tween 2.5 and 10 mg/100 g of dopamine in the pulp and 80–560 mg/100 g in the peel [174].
Avocado contains between 0.4 and 0.5 mg/100 g of dopamine, whereas other plant foods,
such as oranges, tomatoes, aubergines, spinach, peas and wild apples, contain only trace
amounts [175].
However, dietary dopamine cannot cross the BBB and, consequently,
cannot exert its effect within the brain.
Only levodopa (L‑DOPA), a dopamine pre‑
cursor, can cross the BBB to be converted into dopamine in the brain by the enzyme
DOPA‑decarboxylase.
Ancient Indian texts, dating back thousands of years, documented that individuals
suffering from tremors, rigidity, and gait disorders were treated with plant food belong‑
ing to the Fabaceae family [176]. Faba beans (Vicia faba, VF), also known as Broad Beans,
are seeds of a leguminous plant. Guggenheim in 1913 identified the presence of levodopa
in the seeds, pods, and beans of VF [176]. VF can contain a variable amount of levodopa,
depending on different factors, such as species, climate zone, soil conditions, and precipi‑
tation. The amount of levodopa in VF is enough to be pharmacologically active in PD [177].
In 1993, a small study conducted on five controls and six PD patients demonstrated that VF
ingestion produced a significant increase in levodopa plasma levels, which correlated to
improved motor function [176]. Participants ingested 250 g of cooked broad beans. After
12 h off‑treatment, PD patients exhibited significant motor improvement over the follow‑
ing four hours; however, half of the participants developed marked dyskinesias. PD motor
improvement was similar to a treatment with 125 mg of levodopa combined with 12.5 mg
of carbidopa [178]. Fresh green VF contain more levodopa than dried VF, and roasting or
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
15 of 28
boiling processing reduces the levodopa content [179,180]. Half a cup of cooked VF (100 g)
contains approximately 250 mg of levodopa, and sprouted VF beans contain the highest
levodopa concentrations [181]. VF does not contain only levodopa but also carbidopa, and
this contributes to the motor improvement [182].
The primary challenge is that treating PD patients requires large quantities of VF to be
consumed, which may cause side effects, including flatulence and abdominal bloating. VF
is also rich in tyramine, and for this reason, it should be consumed carefully with concomi‑
tant MAO inhibitor (I‑MAO) therapy, often taken by PD patients. In fact, this interaction
could lead to a dangerous elevation in blood pressure [183]. Nevertheless, since VF con‑
tains appreciable amounts of levodopa, a sudden interruption of its consumption might
trigger a neuroleptic malignant‑like syndrome, as has been reported in the literature, in‑
dicating that alternative therapies share similar risks to conventional ones, so caution is
always needed [181]. Additionally, PD patients affected also by favism cannot consume
VF because of the lack of glucose‑6‑phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD).
Other beans, such as common beans, green beans and soy beans, contain levodopa at
a lower amount. Phaseolus vulgaris, a common bean, contains 0.25 g/100 g of levodopa, al‑
though studies on its use in PD are lacking [184]. Soybeans contain 0.02 g/100 g of levodopa,
but they contain genistein, an isoflavone, which inhibits DOPA‑decarboxylase, increasing
the bioavailability of levodopa [185]. In PD patients, the consumption of 11 g of roasted
soybeans as an adjunct to levodopa/carbidopa treatment led to significant motor improve‑
ment compared to synthetic levodopa alone, while also reducing dyskinesias [186]. Cocoa
beans contain phenylethylamine, a dopamine precursor, although no motor improvement
has been reported in PD patients treated with dark chocolate [187]. Another bean that
has been recognized to be beneficial in PD is Velvet beans (Mucuna pruriens, MP), a trop‑
ical legume, belonging to the family of Fabaceae, native to Africa and tropical Asia but
cultivated nowadays in different countries. They are used in Ayurveda medicine as anti‑
inflammatory agents and are also used in Asian traditional medicine, especially in India, to
treat different diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases like PD. MP contains about
10 times more levodopa compared with VF, which represents the highest amount of lev‑
odopa among all plant foods [184]: for this reason, it can be eaten as food in place of a
supplement. All parts of MP have medicinal properties, particularly neuroprotective ef‑
fect. Specifically, this legume has potential therapeutic effects in PD as its seeds contain
high doses of levodopa (4–7% of its weight), similar to that contained in synthetic levodopa
drugs [188]. MP levodopa seems to be more effective than standard levodopa, probably
due to an unknown dopamine decarboxylase inhibitor contained in the bean [189]. How‑
ever, the bioavailability of levodopa from velvet beans may vary depending on different
factors, including preparation methods. The effectiveness of MP in improving PD symp‑
toms and its safety has been demonstrated in several open‑label randomized clinical tri‑
als [190,191]. A double‑blind clinical and pharmacological study tested the efficacy of MP
compared to standard levodopa/carbidopa therapy, and it was found that 30 g of MP can
lead to a more rapid effect and a shorter latency to levodopa peak, without concomitant
dyskinesias. The fact that MP exerts the same effect as levodopa with fewer side effects,
such as dyskinesias, highlighted the possible advantages of such therapy in place of stan‑
dard levodopa, especially in the long‑term management of PD [192]. In another small
double‑blind, randomized, controlled, crossover study, performed on 18 PD patients, the
administration of 12.5 mg/kg of MP showed a similar effect to the one induced by dis‑
persible levodopa/benserazide (3.5 mg/kg), but with fewer dyskinesias and adverse events.
The administration of a higher dose of MP (17.5 mg/kg) resulted in better motor improve‑
ment and longer ‘ON’ duration, while simultaneously reducing the incidence of dyskine‑
sias and adverse events. The conclusion of this study was that single‑dose MP intake has
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
16 of 28
an analogous efficacy and safety compared to dispersible levodopa/benserazide. Clinical
effects of high‑dose MP are similar to those obtained through levodopa, but with higher
tolerability [193]. A 16‑week open‑labeled phase 2 pilot trial was performed on 14 Boli‑
vian PD patients in an advanced stage of the disease. These patients were treated with a
daily dose of MP. Fifty percent of these patients withdrew from the trial prematurely due
to gastrointestinal side effects and motor worsening; however, the remaining 50% showed
a motor response comparable to that obtained using standard levodopa/carbidopa. The
overall benefit of MP was limited by its scarce tolerability [194]. These small studies high‑
light that further investigation is needed on larger cohorts of patients to assess the safety
and efficacy of MP, especially in the long term.
PD therapies are still unavailable and unaffordable in most Low‑Income Countries, es‑
pecially synthetic levodopa, and MP may be considered in these countries as an alternative
to standard drug therapy used for the treatment of PD [195]. Roots and seeds of MP are rich
in terpenes, sterols (β‑sitosterol, ursolic acid, etc.), NADH, and Coenzyme Q10 [196,197].
These compounds exert a potent antioxidant and anti‑inflammatory effect [198,199]. Due
to the natural variability in its levodopa content, standardizing the dosage of MP remains
an important challenge. MP can also interact with other medications [194] and it can be
harmful when consumed in large amounts, so medical surveillance is mandatory. Com‑
mon side effects reported in patients are gastrointestinal, like nausea, vomiting, and loss
of appetite, but also neuropsychiatric, like paranoid delusions, hallucinations, and delir‑
ium. Currently, there is insufficient data regarding the long‑term effects of MP and con‑
sequently, a cautious approach in its clinical application is warranted [184]. Therefore,
although promising, MP cannot actually be considered a standardized therapy for PD.
In summary, although velvet beans are promising alternative choices for PD treat‑
ment, their use has not yet been standardized in the clinical setting, and other studies are
needed to define their safety, efficacy, and long‑term effects. Levodopa/carbidopa and lev‑
odopa/benserazide remain the gold‑standard therapy for PD, although regular consump‑
tion of a variety of beans may provide further benefits.
14. An Ideal Nutritional Approach to PD Patients
It is essential for PD patients to follow a well‑planned diet, as food can affect both the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of levodopa: the most effective symptomatic
treatment for the disease. Specifically, meals can slow gastric emptying, thereby delaying
levodopa absorption in the small intestine. On the other hand, large neutral amino acids
(LNAAs) compete with its saturable transport system in the intestine. The LNAA L‑leucine
decreases the intestinal absorption of levodopa by 50% [200]. Levodopa also competes
with a highly saturable LNAA transporter located at the BBB, and it is the competition at
this site that mainly contributes to the variability in levodopa pharmacokinetics [201]. The
main determinant of LNAA plasma levels is protein loading, and for this reason, the diet
should limit protein intake to the recommendation for the general population. Ideally, the
diet for PD patients should be normoproteic (protein around 10–15% of total calories with
about 0.8–1.0 g/kg/day), avoiding further limiting of the protein intake, because protein
deficiency can lead to malnutrition and sarcopenia [173]. In order to maximize levodopa
efficacy, a redistribution of protein in meals, concentrating most of it at dinner, might be
a reasonable approach [202]. In addition, the diet should be rich in insoluble fiber to in‑
crease levodopa bioavailability with a consequent improvement in motor function [203].
Proteins from plant‑based foods, such as legumes and vegetables, should be preferred as
they also contain fiber, which helps regulate gastrointestinal transit. Conversely, a high
intake of animal proteins, such as in meat‑based diets, can interfere with levodopa absorp‑
tion and bioavailability, often correlating with increased motor fluctuations throughout
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
17 of 28
the day [204]. A pilot study by Baroni et al., performed on 25 PD patients for four weeks,
reported that a vegan, plant‑based diet incorporating a protein‑redistribution strategy sig‑
nificantly improved both the stage (Hoehn and Yahr Staging Scale, 1.96 vs. 3.15, p = 0.005)
and the UPDRS total score (47.67 vs. 74.46, p = 0.008) and UPDRS Part III motor perfor‑
mances (25.42 vs. 46.46, p = 0.001). This dietary intervention effectively minimized the
competitive interference between dietary amino acids and levodopa absorption during ac‑
tive daytime hours [173]. Indeed, a plant‑based diet, especially in its vegan variant, can
increase levodopa bioavailability also thanks to a higher fiber content when compared to
omnivorous diets. Beyond dietary composition, levodopa should be taken on an empty
stomach, ideally 60 min before a meal or 2 h after a meal. It is important that PD patients
receive adequate nutritional counseling in order to plan the most suitable diet for the dis‑
ease but also for their lifestyle and personal taste. Challenges to dietary adherence include
chemosensory alterations, such as hyposmia, which can reduce appetite, gastrointestinal
dysmotility and nausea that can also reduce food intake. In addition to that, advanced PD
patients often have dysphagia, which is an important contributor to malnutrition. Dietary
choices are also influenced by cultural food preferences, comorbidities and social factors.
A personalized diet in PD should account for all these factors and routine nutritional as‑
sessment is mandatory to prevent malnutrition and optimize levodopa pharmacokinetics.
The nutritional approach should always be personalized to increase patients’ compliance
and their overall quality of life.
The core neurodegenerative processes of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) are summarized in
Table 1, while the specific nutritional risk factors and protective dietary elements, alongside
their respective pathophysiological mechanisms, are detailed in Tables 2 and 3.
Table 1. Parkinson’s Disease Neurodegenerative mechanisms.
Mechanisms
Description
Consequences
Dopaminergic neuron loss
Degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons located in the SNpc of the
mesencephalus.
Striatal dopamine loss and PD motor and
non‑motors symptoms development [8].
α‑synuclein aggregation
Pathologic misfolded α‑synuclein
aggregation form Lewy bodies [205].
Synaptic dysfunction and neuronal
death [206].
Oxidative stress
ROS formation and oxidation of
macromolecules including lipids,
proteins and nucleic acids [207].
Mitocondrial dysfunction,
neuroinflammation and neuronal
damage [208].
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Impaired endo‑lysosomal‑proteasome
system functioning [209].
Decline mitochondrial bioenergetics and
the subsequent triggering of
stress‑mediated apoptotic cascade [210].
Endolysosomal impairment
Caused by oxidative stress, GBA1
mutations and α‑synuclein
aggregation [211].
Disruption of proteostasis, autophagy,
and mitophagy, leading to the
accumulation of misfolded proteins such
as α‑synuclein and damaged
mitochondria with consequent
neurodegeneration [212].
Synaptic dysfunction
As a consequence of the
aforementioned mechanisms but
especially α‑synuclein
deposition [213].
Axonal damage, connectome dysfunction
and neurodegeneration [213].
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
18 of 28
Table 2. Nutritional risk factors and related mechanisms linked to Parkinson’s Disease.
Nutritional Risk Factors
Mechanisms
Meat and its derivatives
Several dietary factors linked to animal‑based products have been
implicated in PD, including saturated fatty acids (SFAs) [18] and
heterocyclic amines (HCAs), which demonstrate specific neurotoxicity
toward dopaminergic (DA) neurons [22]. Additionally, these dietary
sources may facilitate the introduction of exogenous α‑synuclein [23] and
promote gut microbiota dysbiosis [26], thereby fostering a
pro‑inflammatory environment conducive to neurodegeneration.
Seafoods
Chronic exposure to elevated levels of heavy metals may significantly
contribute to PD pathogenesis through several mechanisms. Specifically,
these contaminants exhibit high affinity for dopamine D2 receptors [39],
and promote the misfolding and presynaptic aggregation of α‑synuclein
[40]. Furthermore, heavy metal‑induced disruption of blood–brain barrier
(BBB) integrity [41] exacerbate neuronal vulnerability by allowing
systemic toxins penetrating the brain parenchyma.
Dairy products and low UA levels
The association between dairy intake and PD may be driven by a
synergistic toxicological profile. This includes exposure to bioaccumulated
pesticides and D‑galactose induced mitochondrial dysfunction [58].
Moreover, dairy protein intake can lead to a significant reduction in serum
uric acid (UA) concentrations [59], reducing the amount of circulating
antioxidants that can counteract dopaminergic loss.
Dietary fat intake
Dietary saturated fatty acids (SFAs) can act as potent triggers for low‑grade
chronic inflammation [19,61]. This proinflammatory environment fuels
oxidative stress [63], further contributing to DA neuron degeneration.
Pesticides
Some pesticides can act like neurotoxicants: paraquat, rotenone, and
several organochlorines have been identified as significant environmental
risk factors for PD [71,72]. Their mechanisms of action include
mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, DNA methylation, altered
calcium transient [75] and intestinal dysbiosis [76], with all mechanisms
further contributing to neurodegeneration.
Table 3. Nutritional protective factors and related mechanisms linked to Parkinson’s Disease.
Nutritional Protective Factors
Mechanisms
Flavonoids
Neuroprotective phytonutrients are capable of reducing α‑synuclein
aggregation [103] and mitigating oxidative stress. These compounds also
promote a healthy gut microbiota composition [123]. Specifically,
anthocyanins exhibit significant neuroprotective properties toward
dopaminergic (DA) neurons by enhancing mitochondrial bioenergetics,
scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS), and preserving membrane
integrity, which collectively contribute to the rescue of DA neurons in PD
models [114].
Coffee
The neuroprotective role of caffeine is primarily attributed to its antagonism
on adenosine A2A receptors, a mechanism that mitigates neuroinflammation
and excitotoxicity in DA neurons [131]. Additionally, caffeine can contribute
to proteostasis by inhibiting α‑synuclein aggregation [132], and can enhance
cellular defenses through its intrinsic antioxidant properties [133].
Edible Solanaceae
Nicotine has been found to suppress α‑synuclein aggregation [147], while
various other alkaloids identified in dietary sources demonstrated significant
neuroprotective and anti‑inflammatory properties [146,153].
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
19 of 28
15. Limitations
This review has included in vitro studies and human trials, while excluding animal
studies. The limitation of in vitro studies is that they lack the complex physiological con‑
text of the human body, especially gut–central nervous system interaction. Furthermore,
nutrient metabolism and bioavailability in vivo cannot be replicated. Moreover, in vitro
experiments cannot highlight genetic variability and individual responses to dietary inter‑
ventions. Trials on humans are limited by small sample sizes, short intervention durations,
and heterogeneous dietary interventions and outcome measures. This heterogeneity may
not lead to strong meta‑analysis, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions about the
efficacy of specific dietary patterns or nutrients in modifying disease progression or symp‑
toms. Larger high‑quality randomized controlled trials are necessary to define which food
and dietary pattern are more protective against PD, including plant‑based diets.
16. Conclusions
PD ranks among the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorders globally, and nutri‑
tion may represent a pivotal modifiable risk factor. The current medical literature consis‑
tently demonstrates strong evidence for dairy intake as a risk factor for PD, with multiple
large prospective cohort studies and meta‑analyses showing a dose‑dependent increase in
risk. Strong evidence also exists for low UA levels and pesticide intake as risk factors for
PD, whereas for other foods, such as meat and saturated fat, the evidence is less consis‑
tent and generally weaker, with some studies suggesting a possible increased risk for PD.
Moderate‑to‑strong evidence also exists for coffee consumption as a protective dietary fac‑
tor against PD. The evidence regarding plant‑based foods and in general healthy dietary
patterns (Mediterranean diet, MIND) as protective against PD is moderate. In conclusion,
a diet excluding animals and animal‑derived products, specifically dairy products, may
lower exposure to several dietary risk factors linked to the pathogenesis of PD. Moreover,
plant foods contain many neuroprotective compounds, such as flavonoids and fiber, and
they are more sustainable. Besides neuroprotective effects, a high intake of plant foods
and a low intake of animal foods can improve PD symptoms such as constipation and
levodopa absorption. Adherence to a well‑planned plant‑based diet, particularly a vegan
pattern, can ensure adequate protein intake without competing with levodopa absorption.
Although further studies are required to clarify which specific phytonutrients exert the
most significant neuroprotective effects, a balanced plant‑based diet can help prevent var‑
ious chronic diseases. Furthermore, PD patients may benefit from the consumption of
plant‑based foods, which exert beneficial effects on both symptom management and dis‑
ease progression.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.T. and L.B.; methodology, I.T.; writing—original draft
preparation, I.T. and G.R.; writing—review and editing, I.T., F.G. and M.B.; supervision, L.B., G.R.
and M.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
20 of 28
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
PD
Parkinson’s Disease
LBD
Lewy Body Dementia
LNAAs
Large Neutral Amino Acids
VF
Vicia faba
MP
Mucuna pruriens
BBB
Blood–Brain Barrier
UA
Uric Acid
References
1.
Attuquayefio, T.; Stevenson, R.J.; Oaten, M.J.; Francis, H.M. A Four‑Day Western‑Style Dietary Intervention Causes Reductions
in Hippocampal‑Dependent Learning and Memory and Interoceptive Sensitivity. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0172645. [CrossRef]
2.
Baym, C.L.; Khan, N.A.; Monti, J.M.; Raine, L.B.; Drollette, E.S.; Moore, R.D.; Scudder, M.R.; Kramer, A.F.; Hillman, C.H.; Cohen,
N.J. Dietary Lipids Are Differentially Associated with Hippocampal‑Dependent Relational Memory in Prepubescent Children.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 1026–1032. [CrossRef]
3.
Gibson, E.L.; Barr, S.; Jeanes, Y.M. Habitual Fat Intake Predicts Memory Function in Younger Women. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
2013, 7, 838. [CrossRef]
4.
Hoscheidt, S.; Sanderlin, A.H.; Baker, L.D.; Jung, Y.; Lockhart, S.; Kellar, D.; Whitlow, C.T.; Hanson, A.J.; Friedman, S.; Register,
T.; et al. Mediterranean and Western Diet Effects on Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarkers, Cerebral Perfusion, and Cognition in
Mid‑Life: A Randomized Trial. Alzheimer’s Dement. 2022, 18, 457–468. [CrossRef]
5.
Knight, E.; Geetha, T.; Burnett, D.; Babu, J.R. The Role of Diet and Dietary Patterns in Parkinson’s Disease. Nutrients 2022, 14, 4472.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Kalia, L.V.; Lang, A.E. Parkinson’s Disease. Lancet 2015, 386, 896–912. [CrossRef]
7.
Ascherio, A.; Schwarzschild, M.A. The Epidemiology of Parkinson’s Disease: Risk Factors and Prevention. Lancet Neurol. 2016,
15, 1257–1272. [CrossRef]
8.
Braak, H.; Del Tredici, K.; Rüb, U.; de Vos, R.A.I.; Jansen Steur, E.N.H.; Braak, E. Staging of Brain Pathology Related to Sporadic
Parkinson’s Disease. Neurobiol. Aging 2003, 24, 197–211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Rodrigues, P.V.; de Godoy, J.V.P.; Bosque, B.P.; Amorim Neto, D.P.; Tostes, K.; Palameta, S.; Garcia‑Rosa, S.; Tonoli, C.C.C.;
de Carvalho, H.F.; de Castro Fonseca, M. Transcellular Propagation of Fibrillar α‑Synuclein from Enteroendocrine to Neuronal
Cells Requires Cell‑to‑Cell Contact and Is Rab35‑Dependent. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 4168. [CrossRef]
10.
Svensson, E.; Horváth‑Puhó, E.; Thomsen, R.W.; Djurhuus, J.C.; Pedersen, L.; Borghammer, P.; Sørensen, H.T. Vagotomy and
Subsequent Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Ann. Neurol. 2015, 78, 522–529. [CrossRef]
11.
Bianchi, V.E.; Rizzi, L.; Somaa, F. The Role of Nutrition on Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review. Nutr. Neurosci. 2023,
26, 605–628. [CrossRef]
12.
Trinh, J.; de Vries, N.M.; Chan, P.; Dekker, M.C.J.; Helmich, R.C.; Bloem, B.R. The Role of Lifestyle Interventions in Symptom
Management and Disease Modification in Parkinson’s Disease. Lancet Neurol. 2026, 25, 90–102. [CrossRef]
13.
Cassotta, M.; Geerts, H.; Harbom, L.; Outeiro, T.F.; Pediaditakis, I.; Reiner, O.; Schildknecht, S.; Schwamborn, J.C.; Bailey, J.; Her‑
rmann, K.; et al. The Future of Parkinson’s Disease Research: A New Paradigm of Human‑Specific Investigation Is Necessary…
and Possible. ALTEX 2022, 39, 694–709. [CrossRef]
14.
Georgiou, A.; Demetriou, C.A.; Christou, Y.P.; Heraclides, A.; Leonidou, E.; Loukaides, P.; Yiasoumi, E.; Pantziaris, M.; Kleopa,
K.A.; Papacostas, S.S.; et al. Genetic and Environmental Factors Contributing to Parkinson’s Disease: A Case‑Control Study in
the Cypriot Population. Front. Neurol. 2019, 10, 1047. [CrossRef]
15.
Shermon, S.; Goldfinger, M.; Morris, A.; Harper, B.; Leder, A.; Santella, A.J.; Krishnamachari, B. Effect of Modifiable Risk Factors
in Parkinson’s Disease: A Case‑Control Study Looking at Common Dietary Factors, Toxicants, and Anti‑Inflammatory Medica‑
tions. Chronic Illn. 2022, 18, 849–859. [CrossRef]
16.
Veronese, N.; Nova, A.; Fazia, T.; Riggi, E.; Yang, L.; Piccio, L.; Huang, B.‑H.; Ahmadi, M.; Barbagallo, M.; Notarnicola, M.;
et al. Contribution of Nutritional, Lifestyle, and Metabolic Risk Factors to Parkinson’s Disease. Mov. Disord. 2024, 39, 1203–1212.
[CrossRef]
17.
Johnson, C.C.; Gorell, J.M.; Rybicki, B.A.; Sanders, K.; Peterson, E.L. Adult Nutrient Intake as a Risk Factor for Parkinson’s
Disease. Int. J. Epidemiol. 1999, 28, 1102–1109. [CrossRef]
18.
Kamel, F.; Goldman, S.M.; Umbach, D.M.; Chen, H.; Richardson, G.; Barber, M.R.; Meng, C.; Marras, C.; Korell, M.; Kasten, M.;
et al. Dietary Fat Intake, Pesticide Use, and Parkinson’s Disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 2014, 20, 82–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
21 of 28
19.
Hantikainen, E.; Roos, E.; Bellocco, R.; D’Antonio, A.; Grotta, A.; Adami, H.‑O.; Ye, W.; Trolle Lagerros, Y.; Bonn, S. Dietary Fat
Intake and Risk of Parkinson Disease: Results from the Swedish National March Cohort. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2022, 37, 603–613.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Turesky, R.J. Formation and Biochemistry of Carcinogenic Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines in Cooked Meats. Toxicol. Lett. 2007,
168, 219–227. [CrossRef]
21.
Felton, J.S.; Knize, M.G.; Wu, R.W.; Colvin, M.E.; Hatch, F.T.; Malfatti, M.A. Mutagenic Potency of Food‑Derived Heterocyclic
Amines. Mutat. Res. 2007, 616, 90–94. [CrossRef]
22.
Griggs, A.M.; Agim, Z.S.; Mishra, V.R.; Tambe, M.A.; Director‑Myska, A.E.; Turteltaub, K.W.; McCabe, G.P.; Rochet, J.‑C.; Can‑
non, J.R. 2‑Amino‑1‑Methyl‑6‑Phenylimidazo[4,5‑b]Pyridine (PhIP) Is Selectively Toxic to Primary Dopaminergic Neurons in
Vitro. Toxicol. Sci. 2014, 140, 179–189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Gonzalez‑Freire, M.; Semba, R.D.; Ubaida‑Mohien, C.; Fabbri, E.; Scalzo, P.; Højlund, K.; Dufresne, C.; Lyashkov, A.; Ferrucci,
L. The Human Skeletal Muscle Proteome Project: A Reappraisal of the Current Literature. J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2017,
8, 5–18. [CrossRef]
24.
Jackson, A.; Forsyth, C.B.; Shaikh, M.; Voigt, R.M.; Engen, P.A.; Ramirez, V.; Keshavarzian, A. Diet in Parkinson’s Disease:
Critical Role for the Microbiome. Front. Neurol. 2019, 10, 1245. [CrossRef]
25.
Hajare, S.; Kulkarni, Y.A. Parkinson’s Disease and the Gut‑Brain Connection: Unveiling Pathways, Mechanisms and Promising
Therapies. Brain Res. 2025, 1868, 149975. [CrossRef]
26.
Perez‑Pardo, P.; Kliest, T.; Dodiya, H.B.; Broersen, L.M.; Garssen, J.; Keshavarzian, A.; Kraneveld, A.D. The Gut‑Brain Axis in
Parkinson’s Disease: Possibilities for Food‑Based Therapies. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2017, 817, 86–95. [CrossRef]
27.
Bai, F.; You, L.; Lei, H.; Li, X. Association between Increased and Decreased Gut Microbiota Abundance and Parkinson’s Disease:
A Systematic Review and Subgroup Meta‑Analysis. Exp. Gerontol. 2024, 191, 112444. [CrossRef]
28.
Tomova, A.; Bukovsky, I.; Rembert, E.; Yonas, W.; Alwarith, J.; Barnard, N.D.; Kahleova, H. The Effects of Vegetarian and Vegan
Diets on Gut Microbiota. Front. Nutr. 2019, 6, 47. [CrossRef]
29.
Bazinet, R.P.; Layé, S. Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Metabolites in Brain Function and Disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
2014, 15, 771–785. [CrossRef]
30.
McCarty, M.F.; Lerner, A. Nutraceuticals Targeting Generation and Oxidant Activity of Peroxynitrite May Aid Prevention and
Control of Parkinson’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 3624. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Avallone, R.; Vitale, G.; Bertolotti, M. Omega‑3 Fatty Acids and Neurodegenerative Diseases: New Evidence in Clinical Trials.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 4256. [CrossRef]
32.
Liu, B.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, Z.; Liu, M.; Zhang, C.; Zhao, Y.; Song, C. ω‑3 DPA Protected Neurons from Neuroinflammation by Bal‑
ancing Microglia M1/M2 Polarizations through Inhibiting NF‑κB/MAPK P38 Signaling and Activating Neuron‑BDNF‑PI3K/AKT
Pathways. Mar. Drugs 2021, 19, 587. [CrossRef]
33.
Lin, F.; Shi, Y.; Zheng, J.; Li, Y.; Chen, X.; Zou, X.; Hong, Y.; Chen, K.; Zeng, Y.; Ye, Q.; et al. Fish Oil Supplementation, Physical
Activity and Risk of Incident Parkinson’s Disease: Results of Longitudinal Analysis from the UK Biobank. Front. Aging Neurosci.
2023, 15, 1304629. [CrossRef]
34.
Dhapola, R.; Kumari, S.; Sharma, P.; Paidlewar, M.; Vellingiri, B.; Medhi, B.; HariKrishnaReddy, D. Cytokine Associated Neu‑
roinflammation in Parkinson’s Disease: Molecular Pathways, Therapeutic Targets, and Translational Insights. Cytokine Growth
Factor. Rev. 2026, 88, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Wu, F.; Wang, D.‑D.; Shi, H.‑H.; Wang, C.‑C.; Xue, C.‑H.; Wang, Y.‑M.; Zhang, T.‑T. N‑3 PUFA‑Deficiency in Early Life Exhibits
Aggravated MPTP‑Induced Neurotoxicity in Old Age While Supplementation with DHA/EPA‑Enriched Phospholipids Exerts
a Neuroprotective Effect. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2021, 65, e2100339. [CrossRef]
36.
Chitre, N.M.; Wood, B.J.; Ray, A.; Moniri, N.H.; Murnane, K.S. Docosahexaenoic Acid Protects Motor Function and Increases
Dopamine Synthesis in a Rat Model of Parkinson’s Disease via Mechanisms Associated with Increased Protein Kinase Activity
in the Striatum. Neuropharmacology 2020, 167, 107976. [CrossRef]
37.
Green, A.J.; Planchart, A. The Neurological Toxicity of Heavy Metals: A Fish Perspective. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol.
Pharmacol. 2018, 208, 12–19. [CrossRef]
38.
Gorell, J.M.; Johnson, C.C.; Rybicki, B.A.; Peterson, E.L.; Kortsha, G.X.; Brown, G.G.; Richardson, R.J. Occupational Exposure to
Manganese, Copper, Lead, Iron, Mercury and Zinc and the Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Neurotoxicology 1999, 20, 239–247.
39.
Scheuhammer, A.M.; Cherian, M.G. Effects of Heavy Metal Cations, Sulfhydryl Reagents and Other Chemical Agents on Striatal
D2 Dopamine Receptors. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1985, 34, 3405–3413. [CrossRef]
40.
Miller, K.; Ochudło, S.; Opala, G.; Smolicha, W.; Siuda, J. Parkinsonism in chronic occupational metallic mercury intoxication.
Neurol. Neurochir. Pol. 2003, 37, 31–38.
41.
Rai, A.; Maurya, S.K.; Khare, P.; Srivastava, A.; Bandyopadhyay, S. Characterization of Developmental Neurotoxicity of As, Cd,
and Pb Mixture: Synergistic Action of Metal Mixture in Glial and Neuronal Functions. Toxicol. Sci. 2010, 118, 586–601. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
22 of 28
42.
Karri, V.; Schuhmacher, M.; Kumar, V. Heavy Metals (Pb, Cd, As and MeHg) as Risk Factors for Cognitive Dysfunction: A
General Review of Metal Mixture Mechanism in Brain. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2016, 48, 203–213. [CrossRef]
43.
Lane, K.; Derbyshire, E.; Li, W.; Brennan, C. Bioavailability and Potential Uses of Vegetarian Sources of Omega‑3 Fatty Acids: A
Review of the Literature. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2014, 54, 572–579. [CrossRef]
44.
Hughes, K.C.; Gao, X.; Kim, I.Y.; Wang, M.; Weisskopf, M.G.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Ascherio, A. Intake of Dairy Foods and Risk
of Parkinson Disease. Neurology 2017, 89, 46–52. [CrossRef]
45.
Chen, H.; Zhang, S.M.; Hernán, M.A.; Willett, W.C.; Ascherio, A. Diet and Parkinson’s Disease: A Potential Role of Dairy
Products in Men. Ann. Neurol. 2002, 52, 793–801. [CrossRef]
46.
Sääksjärvi, K.; Knekt, P.; Lundqvist, A.; Männistö, S.; Heliövaara, M.; Rissanen, H.; Järvinen, R. A Cohort Study on Diet and the
Risk of Parkinson’s Disease: The Role of Food Groups and Diet Quality. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 109, 329–337. [CrossRef]
47.
Kyrozis, A.; Ghika, A.; Stathopoulos, P.; Vassilopoulos, D.; Trichopoulos, D.; Trichopoulou, A. Dietary and Lifestyle Variables
in Relation to Incidence of Parkinson’s Disease in Greece. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2013, 28, 67–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Chen, H.; O’Reilly, E.; McCullough, M.L.; Rodriguez, C.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Calle, E.E.; Thun, M.J.; Ascherio, A. Consumption
of Dairy Products and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2007, 165, 998–1006. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Jiang, W.; Ju, C.; Jiang, H.; Zhang, D. Dairy Foods Intake and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease: A Dose‑Response Meta‑Analysis of
Prospective Cohort Studies. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2014, 29, 613–619. [CrossRef]
50.
Waliszewski, S.M.; Pardio, V.T.; Waliszewski, K.N.; Chantiri, J.N.; Infanzon, R.M.; Rivera, J. Detection of Some Organochlorine
Pesticides in Cow’s Milk. Food Addit. Contam. 1996, 13, 231–235. [CrossRef]
51.
Wang, A.; Cockburn, M.; Ly, T.T.; Bronstein, J.M.; Ritz, B. The Association between Ambient Exposure to Organophosphates
and Parkinson’s Disease Risk. Occup. Environ. Med. 2014, 71, 275–281. [CrossRef]
52.
Abbott, R.D.; Ross, G.W.; Petrovitch, H.; Masaki, K.H.; Launer, L.J.; Nelson, J.S.; White, L.R.; Tanner, C.M. Midlife Milk Con‑
sumption and Substantia Nigra Neuron Density at Death. Neurology 2016, 86, 512–519. [CrossRef]
53.
Bulut, S.; Akkaya, L.; Gök, V.; Konuk, M. Organochlorine Pesticide (OCP) Residues in Cow’s, Buffalo’s, and Sheep’s Milk from
Afyonkarahisar Region, Turkey. Environ. Monit. Assess. 2011, 181, 555–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Ciscato, C.H.P.; Gebara, A.B.; de Spinosa, H.S. Pesticide Residues in Cow Milk Consumed in São Paulo City (Brazil). J. Environ.
Sci. Health B 2002, 37, 323–330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Chebli, A.I.; Zergui, A.; Amziane, A.; Zebbiche, Y.; Abdennour, S. Metals in Honey, Cow’s Milk and Eggs in North‑East Algeria
and Health Risk. Food Addit. Contam. Part B Surveill. 2025, 18, 55–64. [CrossRef]
56.
Kistner, A.; Krack, P. Parkinson’s Disease: No Milk Today? Front. Neurol. 2014, 5, 172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Tacoma, R.; Fields, J.; Ebenstein, D.B.; Lam, Y.‑W.; Greenwood, S.L. Characterization of the Bovine Milk Proteome in Early‑
Lactation Holstein and Jersey Breeds of Dairy Cows. J. Proteom. 2016, 130, 200–210. [CrossRef]
58.
Milk and Parkinson Disease: Could Galactose Be the Missing Link—Anna Rita Sarni, Luciana Baroni, 2019. Available online:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.3233/MNM‑180234 (accessed on 29 September 2025).
59.
Choi, H.K.; Atkinson, K.; Karlson, E.W.; Willett, W.; Curhan, G. Purine‑Rich Foods, Dairy and Protein Intake, and the Risk of
Gout in Men. N. Engl. J. Med. 2004, 350, 1093–1103. [CrossRef]
60.
Weisskopf, M.G.; O’Reilly, E.; Chen, H.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Ascherio, A. Plasma Urate and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Am.
J. Epidemiol. 2007, 166, 561–567. [CrossRef]
61.
Chen, H.; Zhang, S.M.; Hernán, M.A.; Willett, W.C.; Ascherio, A. Dietary Intakes of Fat and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Am. J.
Epidemiol. 2003, 157, 1007–1014. [CrossRef]
62.
Logroscino, G.; Marder, K.; Cote, L.; Tang, M.X.; Shea, S.; Mayeux, R. Dietary Lipids and Antioxidants in Parkinson’s Disease:
A Population‑Based, Case‑Control Study. Ann. Neurol. 1996, 39, 89–94. [CrossRef]
63.
Mosley, R.L.; Benner, E.J.; Kadiu, I.; Thomas, M.; Boska, M.D.; Hasan, K.; Laurie, C.; Gendelman, H.E. Neuroinflammation,
Oxidative Stress and the Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease. Clin. Neurosci. Res. 2006, 6, 261–281. [CrossRef]
64.
Gao, X.; Zhang, B.; Zheng, Y.; Liu, X.; Rostyslav, P.; Finiuk, N.; Sik, A.; Stoika, R.; Liu, K.; Jin, M. Neuroprotective Effect of
Chlorogenic Acid on Parkinson’s Disease like Symptoms through Boosting the Autophagy in Zebrafish. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2023,
956, 175950. [CrossRef]
65.
de Lau, L.M.L.; Bornebroek, M.; Witteman, J.C.M.; Hofman, A.; Koudstaal, P.J.; Breteler, M.M.B. Dietary Fatty Acids and the
Risk of Parkinson Disease: The Rotterdam Study. Neurology 2005, 64, 2040–2045. [CrossRef]
66.
Abbott, R.D.; Ross, G.W.; White, L.R.; Sanderson, W.T.; Burchfiel, C.M.; Kashon, M.; Sharp, D.S.; Masaki, K.H.; Curb, J.D.;
Petrovitch, H. Environmental, Life‑Style, and Physical Precursors of Clinical Parkinson’s Disease: Recent Findings from the
Honolulu‑Asia Aging Study. J. Neurol. 2003, 250, iii30–iii39. [CrossRef]
67.
Tan, L.C.; Methawasin, K.; Tan, E.‑K.; Tan, J.H.; Au, W.‑L.; Yuan, J.‑M.; Koh, W.‑P. Dietary Cholesterol, Fats and Risk of Parkin‑
son’s Disease in the Singapore Chinese Health Study. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2016, 87, 86–92. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
23 of 28
68.
Abbott, R.D.; Petrovitch, H.; White, L.R.; Masaki, K.H.; Tanner, C.M.; Curb, J.D.; Grandinetti, A.; Blanchette, P.L.; Popper, J.S.;
Ross, G.W. Frequency of Bowel Movements and the Future Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Neurology 2001, 57, 456–462. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
69.
Gao, X.; Chen, H.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Ascherio, A. A Prospective Study of Bowel Movement Frequency and Risk of Parkinson’s
Disease. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2011, 174, 546–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Yan, D.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, L.; Shi, N.; Yan, H. Pesticide Exposure and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease: Dose‑Response Meta‑Analysis
of Observational Studies. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2018, 96, 57–63. [CrossRef]
71.
Tanner, C.M.; Kamel, F.; Ross, G.W.; Hoppin, J.A.; Goldman, S.M.; Korell, M.; Marras, C.; Bhudhikanok, G.S.; Kasten, M.; Chade,
A.R.; et al. Rotenone, Paraquat, and Parkinson’s Disease. Environ. Health Perspect. 2011, 119, 866–872. [CrossRef]
72.
Costa, L.G. The Neurotoxicity of Organochlorine and Pyrethroid Pesticides. Handb. Clin. Neurol. 2015, 131, 135–148. [CrossRef]
73.
Zeliger, H.I. Exposure to Lipophilic Chemicals as a Cause of Neurological Impairments, Neurodevelopmental Disorders and
Neurodegenerative Diseases. Interdiscip. Toxicol. 2013, 6, 103–110. [CrossRef]
74.
Liu, X.; Ma, T.; Qu, B.; Ji, Y.; Liu, Z. Pesticide‑Induced Gene Mutations and Parkinson Disease Risk: A Meta‑Analysis. Genet.
Test. Mol. Biomark. 2013, 17, 826–832. [CrossRef]
75.
Heusinkveld, H.J.; van den Berg, M.; Westerink, R.H.S. In Vitro Dopaminergic Neurotoxicity of Pesticides: A Link with Neu‑
rodegeneration? Vet. Q. 2014, 34, 120–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Kulcsarova, K.; Bang, C.; Berg, D.; Schaeffer, E. Pesticides and the Microbiome‑Gut‑Brain Axis: Convergent Pathways in the
Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease. J. Parkinson’s Dis. 2023, 13, 1079–1106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Malisch, R.; Kotz, A. Dioxins and PCBs in Feed and Food‑‑Review from European Perspective.
Sci.
Total Environ.
2014,
491–492, 2–10. [CrossRef]
78.
Schecter, A.; Startin, J.; Wright, C.; Kelly, M.; Päpke, O.; Lis, A.; Ball, M.; Olson, J. Dioxins in U.S. Food and Estimated Daily
Intake. Chemosphere 1994, 29, 2261–2265. [CrossRef]
79.
Schecter, A.; Cramer, P.; Boggess, K.; Stanley, J.; Päpke, O.; Olson, J.; Silver, A.; Schmitz, M. Intake of Dioxins and Related
Compounds from Food in the U.S. Population. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 2001, 63, 1–18. [CrossRef]
80.
Dickman, M.D.; Leung, C.K.; Leong, M.K. Hong Kong Male Subfertility Links to Mercury in Human Hair and Fish. Sci. Total
Environ. 1998, 214, 165–174. [CrossRef]
81.
James, K.A.; Hall, D.A. Groundwater Pesticide Levels and the Association with Parkinson Disease.
Int.
J. Toxicol.
2015,
34, 266–273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Wen, M.; Zhou, B.; Chen, Y.‑H.; Ma, Z.‑L.; Gou, Y.; Zhang, C.‑L.; Yu, W.‑F.; Jiao, L. Serum Uric Acid Levels in Patients with
Parkinson’s Disease: A Meta‑Analysis. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0173731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Grażyńska, A.; Adamczewska, K.; Antoniuk, S.; Bień, M.; Toś, M.; Kufel, J.; Urbaś, W.; Siuda, J. The Influence of Serum Uric
Acid Level on Non‑Motor Symptoms Occurrence and Severity in Patients with Idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease and Atypical
Parkinsonisms‑A Systematic Review. Medicina 2021, 57, 972. [CrossRef]
84.
Seifar, F.; Dinasarapu, A.R.; Jinnah, H.A. Uric Acid in Parkinson’s Disease: What Is the Connection? Mov. Disord. 2022,
37, 2173–2183. [CrossRef]
85.
Parkinson Study Group SURE‑PD3 Investigators; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Ascherio, A.; Casaceli, C.; Curhan, G.C.; Fitzgerald, R.;
Kamp, C.; Lungu, C.; Macklin, E.A.; Marek, K.; et al. Effect of Urate‑Elevating Inosine on Early Parkinson Disease Progression:
The SURE‑PD3 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2021, 326, 926–939. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Ames, B.N.; Cathcart, R.; Schwiers, E.; Hochstein, P. Uric Acid Provides an Antioxidant Defense in Humans against Oxidant‑
and Radical‑Caused Aging and Cancer: A Hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1981, 78, 6858–6862. [CrossRef]
87.
Davies, K.J.; Sevanian, A.; Muakkassah‑Kelly, S.F.; Hochstein, P. Uric Acid‑Iron Ion Complexes. A New Aspect of the Antioxi‑
dant Functions of Uric Acid. Biochem. J. 1986, 235, 747–754. [CrossRef]
88.
Crotty, G.F.; Ascherio, A.; Schwarzschild, M.A. Targeting Urate to Reduce Oxidative Stress in Parkinson Disease. Exp. Neurol.
2017, 298, 210–224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Farstad, M.; Haug, J.O.; Lindbak, H.; Skaug, O.E. Uric Acid in the Cerebrospinal Fluid in Cerebral Atrophy. Acta Neurol. Scand.
1965, 41, 52–58. [CrossRef]
90.
McFarland, N.R.; Burdett, T.; Desjardins, C.A.; Frosch, M.P.; Schwarzschild, M.A. Postmortem Brain Levels of Urate and Precur‑
sors in Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders. Neurodegener. Dis. 2013, 12, 189–198. [CrossRef]
91.
Devgun, M.S.; Dhillon, H.S. Importance of Diurnal Variations on Clinical Value and Interpretation of Serum Urate Measurements.
J. Clin. Pathol. 1992, 45, 110–113. [CrossRef]
92.
Hallfrisch, J. Metabolic Effects of Dietary Fructose. FASEB J. 1990, 4, 2652–2660. [CrossRef]
93.
Faller, J.; Fox, I.H. Ethanol‑Induced Hyperuricemia: Evidence for Increased Urate Production by Activation of Adenine Nu‑
cleotide Turnover. N. Engl. J. Med. 1982, 307, 1598–1602. [CrossRef]
94.
Kaneko, K.; Aoyagi, Y.; Fukuuchi, T.; Inazawa, K.; Yamaoka, N. Total Purine and Purine Base Content of Common Foodstuffs
for Facilitating Nutritional Therapy for Gout and Hyperuricemia. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2014, 37, 709–721. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
24 of 28
95.
Dalbeth, N.; Palmano, K. Effects of Dairy Intake on Hyperuricemia and Gout. Curr. Rheumatol. Rep. 2011, 13, 132–137. [CrossRef]
96.
Zhang, M.; Lin, L.; Liu, H. Acute Effect of Soy and Soy Products on Serum Uric Acid Concentration among Healthy Chinese
Men. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2018, 27, 1239–1242. [CrossRef]
97.
Campion, E.W.; Glynn, R.J.; DeLabry, L.O. Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia. Risks and Consequences in the Normative Aging
Study. Am. J. Med. 1987, 82, 421–426. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Katsiki, N.; Karagiannis, A.; Athyros, V.G.; Mikhailidis, D.P. Hyperuricaemia: More than Just a Cause of Gout? J. Cardiovasc.
Med. 2013, 14, 397–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Schmidt, J.A.; Crowe, F.L.; Appleby, P.N.; Key, T.J.; Travis, R.C. Serum Uric Acid Concentrations in Meat Eaters, Fish Eaters,
Vegetarians and Vegans: A Cross‑Sectional Analysis in the EPIC‑Oxford Cohort. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e56339. [CrossRef]
100. Zgaga, L.; Theodoratou, E.; Kyle, J.; Farrington, S.M.; Agakov, F.; Tenesa, A.; Walker, M.; McNeill, G.; Wright, A.F.; Rudan, I.;
et al. The Association of Dietary Intake of Purine‑Rich Vegetables, Sugar‑Sweetened Beverages and Dairy with Plasma Urate, in
a Cross‑Sectional Study. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e38123. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Dalbeth, N.; Horne, A.; Gamble, G.D.; Ames, R.; Mason, B.; McQueen, F.M.; Bolland, M.J.; Grey, A.; Reid, I.R. The Effect of Cal‑
cium Supplementation on Serum Urate: Analysis of a Randomized Controlled Trial. Rheumatology 2009, 48, 195–197. [CrossRef]
102. Meng, X.; Munishkina, L.A.; Fink, A.L.; Uversky, V.N. Effects of Various Flavonoids on the α‑Synuclein Fibrillation Process.
Parkinson’s Dis. 2010, 2010, 650794. [CrossRef]
103. Khorsand, F.R.; Dabirmanesh, B.; Khajeh, K. Therapeutic Potential of Flavonoids against α‑Synuclein Aggregation in Parkinson’s
Disease: Integrative in Silico and in Vitro Analysis. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2025, 1002, 177829. [CrossRef]
104. Meng, X.; Munishkina, L.A.; Fink, A.L.; Uversky, V.N. Molecular Mechanisms Underlying the Flavonoid‑Induced Inhibition of
Alpha‑Synuclein Fibrillation. Biochemistry 2009, 48, 8206–8224. [CrossRef]
105. Wang, Y.; Wu, S.; Li, Q.; Lang, W.; Li, W.; Jiang, X.; Wan, Z.; Chen, J.; Wang, H. Epigallocatechin‑3‑Gallate: A Phytochemical as
a Promising Drug Candidate for the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease. Front. Pharmacol. 2022, 13, 977521. [CrossRef]
106. Javed, H.; Ojha, S.; Javed, H.; Ojha, S. Therapeutic Potential of Baicalein in Parkinson’s Disease: Focus on Inhibition of α‑
Synuclein Oligomerization and Aggregation. In Synucleins‑Biochemistry and Role in Diseases; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019;
ISBN 978‑1‑78984‑588‑4.
107. Jiang, M.; Porat‑Shliom, Y.; Pei, Z.; Cheng, Y.; Xiang, L.; Sommers, K.; Li, Q.; Gillardon, F.; Hengerer, B.; Berlinicke, C.; et al.
Baicalein Reduces E46K Alpha‑Synuclein Aggregation in Vitro and Protects Cells against E46K Alpha‑Synuclein Toxicity in Cell
Models of Familiar Parkinsonism. J. Neurochem. 2010, 114, 419–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Zheng, Z.V.; Cheung, C.Y.; Lyu, H.; Chan, H.Y.; Li, Y.; Bian, Z.X.; Wang, K.K.W.; Poon, W.S. Baicalein Enhances the Effect of
Low Dose Levodopa on the Gait Deficits and Protects Dopaminergic Neurons in Experimental Parkinsonism. J. Clin. Neurosci.
2019, 64, 242–251. [CrossRef]
109. Jung, U.J.; Kim, S.R. Effects of Naringin, a Flavanone Glycoside in Grapefruits and Citrus Fruits, on the Nigrostriatal Dopamin‑
ergic Projection in the Adult Brain. Neural Regen. Res. 2014, 9, 1514–1517. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Silva Dos Santos, J.; Gonçalves Cirino, J.P.; de Oliveira Carvalho, P.; Ortega, M.M. The Pharmacological Action of Kaempferol
in Central Nervous System Diseases: A Review. Front. Pharmacol. 2020, 11, 565700. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Han, X.; Zhao, S.; Song, H.; Xu, T.; Fang, Q.; Hu, G.; Sun, L. Kaempferol Alleviates LD‑Mitochondrial Damage by Promoting
Autophagy: Implications in Parkinson’s Disease. Redox Biol. 2021, 41, 101911. [CrossRef]
112. Jin, S.; Zhang, L.; Wang, L. Kaempferol, a Potential Neuroprotective Agent in Neurodegenerative Diseases: From Chemistry to
Medicine. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2023, 165, 115215. [CrossRef]
113. Strathearn, K.E.; Yousef, G.G.; Grace, M.H.; Roy, S.L.; Tambe, M.A.; Ferruzzi, M.G.; Wu, Q.‑L.; Simon, J.E.; Lila, M.A.; Rochet,
J.‑C. Neuroprotective Effects of Anthocyanin‑ and Proanthocyanidin‑Rich Extracts in Cellular Models of Parkinson׳s Disease.
Brain Res. 2014, 1555, 60–77. [CrossRef]
114. Gao, X.; Cassidy, A.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Rimm, E.B.; Ascherio, A. Habitual Intake of Dietary Flavonoids and Risk of Parkinson
Disease. Neurology 2012, 78, 1138–1145. [CrossRef]
115. Lotito, S.B.; Zhang, W.‑J.; Yang, C.S.; Crozier, A.; Frei, B. Metabolic Conversion of Dietary Flavonoids Alters Their Anti‑
Inflammatory and Antioxidant Properties. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2011, 51, 454–463. [CrossRef]
116. Kopalli, S.R.; Behl, T.; Kyada, A.; Rekha, M.M.; Kundlas, M.; Rani, P.; Nathiya, D.; Satyam Naidu, K.; Gulati, M.; Bhise, M.;
et al. Synaptic Plasticity and Neuroprotection: The Molecular Impact of Flavonoids on Neurodegenerative Disease Progression.
Neuroscience 2025, 569, 161–183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Pokimica, B.; García‑Conesa, M.‑T. Critical Evaluation of Gene Expression Changes in Human Tissues in Response to Supple‑
mentation with Dietary Bioactive Compounds: Moving Towards Better‑Quality Studies. Nutrients 2018, 10, 807. [CrossRef]
118. Cheatham, C.L.; Nieman, D.C.; Neilson, A.P.; Lila, M.A. Enhancing the Cognitive Effects of Flavonoids with Physical Activity:
Is There a Case for the Gut Microbiome? Front. Neurosci. 2022, 16, 833202. [CrossRef]
119. Westfall, S.; Pasinetti, G.M. The Gut Microbiota Links Dietary Polyphenols with Management of Psychiatric Mood Disorders.
Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 1196. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
25 of 28
120. Marques, C.; Fernandes, I.; Meireles, M.; Faria, A.; Spencer, J.P.E.; Mateus, N.; Calhau, C. Gut Microbiota Modulation Accounts
for the Neuroprotective Properties of Anthocyanins. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 11341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Guo, T.; Song, D.; Cheng, L.; Zhang, X. Interactions of Tea Catechins with Intestinal Microbiota and Their Implication for Human
Health. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 2019, 28, 1617–1625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Açar, Y.; Ağagündüz, D.; De Cicco, P.; Capasso, R. Flavonoids: Their Putative Neurologic Roles, Epigenetic Changes, and Gut
Microbiota Alterations in Parkinson’s Disease. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2023, 168, 115788. [CrossRef]
123. Martini, D.; Del Bo’, C.; Tassotti, M.; Riso, P.; Del Rio, D.; Brighenti, F.; Porrini, M. Coffee Consumption and Oxidative Stress: A
Review of Human Intervention Studies. Molecules 2016, 21, 979. [CrossRef]
124. Yenisetti, S.C.; Muralidhara. Beneficial Role of Coffee and Caffeine in Neurodegenerative Diseases: A Minireview. AIMS Public
Health 2016, 3, 407–422. [CrossRef]
125. Paul, K.C.; Chuang, Y.‑H.; Shih, I.‑F.; Keener, A.; Bordelon, Y.; Bronstein, J.M.; Ritz, B. The Association between Lifestyle Factors
and Parkinson’s Disease Progression and Mortality. Mov. Disord. 2019, 34, 58–66. [CrossRef]
126. Zhao, Y.; Lai, Y.; Konijnenberg, H.; Huerta, J.M.; Vinagre‑Aragon, A.; Sabin, J.A.; Hansen, J.; Petrova, D.; Sacerdote, C.; Zamora‑
Ros, R.; et al. Association of Coffee Consumption and Prediagnostic Caffeine Metabolites with Incident Parkinson Disease in a
Population‑Based Cohort. Neurology 2024, 102, e209201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Belvisi, D.; Pellicciari, R.; Fabbrini, G.; Tinazzi, M.; Berardelli, A.; Defazio, G. Modifiable Risk and Protective Factors in Disease
Development, Progression and Clinical Subtypes of Parkinson’s Disease: What Do Prospective Studies Suggest? Neurobiol. Dis.
2020, 134, 104671. [CrossRef]
128. Hong, C.T.; Chan, L.; Bai, C.‑H. The Effect of Caffeine on the Risk and Progression of Parkinson’s Disease: A Meta‑Analysis.
Nutrients 2020, 12, 1860. [CrossRef]
129. Qi, H.; Li, S. Dose‑Response Meta‑Analysis on Coffee, Tea and Caffeine Consumption with Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Geriatr.
Gerontol. Int. 2014, 14, 430–439. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Chen, J.‑F.; Cunha, R.A. The Belated US FDA Approval of the Adenosine A2A Receptor Antagonist Istradefylline for Treatment
of Parkinson’s Disease. Purinergic Signal. 2020, 16, 167–174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Khodadadi, M.; Javadi, B. A Review of the Protective Effects of Alkaloids against Alpha‑Synuclein Toxicity in Parkinson’s Dis‑
ease. Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 2025, 25, 112–127. [CrossRef]
132. Ludwig, I.A.; Clifford, M.N.; Lean, M.E.J.; Ashihara, H.; Crozier, A. Coffee: Biochemistry and Potential Impact on Health. Food
Funct. 2014, 5, 1695–1717. [CrossRef]
133. Nakayama, T.; Oishi, K. Influence of Coffee (Coffea Arabica) and Galacto‑Oligosaccharide Consumption on Intestinal Microbiota
and the Host Responses. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2013, 343, 161–168. [CrossRef]
134. Paz‑Graniel, I.; Babio, N.; Becerra‑Tomás, N.; Toledo, E.; Camacho‑Barcia, L.; Corella, D.; Castañer‑Niño, O.; Romaguera, D.;
Vioque, J.; Alonso‑Gómez, Á.M.; et al. Association between Coffee Consumption and Total Dietary Caffeine Intake with Cog‑
nitive Functioning: Cross‑Sectional Assessment in an Elderly Mediterranean Population. Eur. J. Nutr. 2021, 60, 2381–2396.
[CrossRef]
135. Cho, B.‑H.; Choi, S.‑M.; Kim, J.‑T.; Kim, B.C. Association of Coffee Consumption and Non‑Motor Symptoms in Drug‑Naïve,
Early‑Stage Parkinson’s Disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 2018, 50, 42–47. [CrossRef]
136. Cho, B.‑H.; Choi, S.‑M.; Kim, B.C. Gender‑Dependent Effect of Coffee Consumption on Tremor Severity in de Novo Parkinson’s
Disease. BMC Neurol. 2019, 19, 194. [CrossRef]
137. Postuma, R.B.; Lang, A.E.; Munhoz, R.P.; Charland, K.; Pelletier, A.; Moscovich, M.; Filla, L.; Zanatta, D.; Rios Romenets, S.;
Altman, R.; et al. Caffeine for Treatment of Parkinson Disease: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Neurology 2012, 79, 651–658.
[CrossRef]
138. Postuma, R.B.; Anang, J.; Pelletier, A.; Joseph, L.; Moscovich, M.; Grimes, D.; Furtado, S.; Munhoz, R.P.; Appel‑Cresswell, S.;
Moro, A.; et al. Caffeine as Symptomatic Treatment for Parkinson Disease (Café‑PD): A Randomized Trial. Neurology 2017,
89, 1795–1803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Li, X.; Li, W.; Liu, G.; Shen, X.; Tang, Y. Association between Cigarette Smoking and Parkinson’s Disease: A Meta‑Analysis. Arch.
Gerontol. Geriatr. 2015, 61, 510–516. [CrossRef]
140. Searles Nielsen, S.; Gallagher, L.G.; Lundin, J.I.; Longstreth, W.T.; Smith‑Weller, T.; Franklin, G.M.; Swanson, P.D.; Checkoway,
H. Environmental Tobacco Smoke and Parkinson’s Disease. Mov. Disord. 2012, 27, 293–296. [CrossRef]
141. di Biase, L.; Pecoraro, P.M.; Carbone, S.P.; Alessi, F.; Di Lazzaro, V. Smoking Exposure and Parkinson’s Disease: A UK Brain
Bank Pathology‑Validated Case‑Control Study. Park. Relat. Disord. 2024, 125, 107022. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Rose, K.N.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Gomperts, S.N. Clearing the Smoke: What Protects Smokers from Parkinson’s Disease? Mov.
Disord. 2024, 39, 267–272. [CrossRef]
143. Castagnoli, K.; Murugesan, T. Tobacco Leaf, Smoke and Smoking, MAO Inhibitors, Parkinson’s Disease and Neuroprotection;
Are There Links? Neurotoxicology 2004, 25, 279–291. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
26 of 28
144. Banerjee, C.; Tripathy, D.; Kumar, D.; Chakraborty, J. Monoamine Oxidase and Neurodegeneration: Mechanisms, Inhibitors
and Natural Compounds for Therapeutic Intervention. Neurochem. Int. 2024, 179, 105831. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Quik, M. Smoking, Nicotine and Parkinson’s Disease. Trends Neurosci. 2004, 27, 561–568. [CrossRef]
146. Hong, D.‑P.; Fink, A.L.; Uversky, V.N. Smoking and Parkinson’s Disease: Does Nicotine Affect Alpha‑Synuclein Fibrillation?
Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA)‑Proteins Proteom. 2009, 1794, 282–290. [CrossRef]
147. Nielsen, S.S.; Franklin, G.M.; Longstreth, W.T.; Swanson, P.D.; Checkoway, H. Nicotine from Edible Solanaceae and Risk of
Parkinson Disease. Ann. Neurol. 2013, 74, 472–477. [CrossRef]
148. Schütte‑Borkovec, K.; Heppel, C.W.; Heling, A.‑K.; Richter, E. Analysis of Myosmine, Cotinine and Nicotine in Human Toenail,
Plasma and Saliva. Biomarkers 2009, 14, 278–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Siegmund, B.; Leitner, E.; Pfannhauser, W. Determination of the Nicotine Content of Various Edible Nightshades (Solanaceae)
and Their Products and Estimation of the Associated Dietary Nicotine Intake. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1999, 47, 3113–3120. [CrossRef]
150. Brody, A.L.; Mandelkern, M.A.; London, E.D.; Olmstead, R.E.; Farahi, J.; Scheibal, D.; Jou, J.; Allen, V.; Tiongson, E.; Chefer,
S.I.; et al. Cigarette Smoking Saturates Brain Alpha 4 Beta 2 Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2006,
63, 907–915. [CrossRef]
151. Paris, D.; Beaulieu‑Abdelahad, D.; Abdullah, L.; Bachmeier, C.; Ait‑Ghezala, G.; Reed, J.; Verma, M.; Crawford, F.; Mullan,
M. Anti‑Inflammatory Activity of Anatabine via Inhibition of STAT3 Phosphorylation. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2013, 698, 145–153.
[CrossRef]
152. Sasahara, I.; Furuhata, Y.; Iwasaki, Y.; Inoue, N.; Sato, H.; Watanabe, T.; Takahashi, M. Assessment of the Biological Similarity
of Three Capsaicin Analogs (Capsinoids) Found in Non‑Pungent Chili Pepper (CH‑19 Sweet) Fruits. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.
2010, 74, 274–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Quik, M.; Perez, X.A.; Bordia, T. Nicotine as a Potential Neuroprotective Agent for Parkinson’s Disease. Mov. Disord. 2012,
27, 947–957. [CrossRef]
154. Hutchins‑Wiese, H.L.; Bales, C.W.; Porter Starr, K.N. Mediterranean Diet Scoring Systems: Understanding the Evolution and
Applications for Mediterranean and Non‑Mediterranean Countries. Br. J. Nutr. 2022, 128, 1371–1392. [CrossRef]
155. Rees, J.; Ryan, J.; Laws, M.; Devine, A. A Comprehensive Examination of the Evidence for Whole of Diet Patterns in Parkinson’s
Disease: A Scoping Review. Nutr. Neurosci. 2024, 27, 547–565. [CrossRef]
156. Okubo, H.; Miyake, Y.; Sasaki, S.; Murakami, K.; Tanaka, K.; Fukushima, W.; Kiyohara, C.; Tsuboi, Y.; Yamada, T.; Oeda, T.; et al.
Dietary Patterns and Risk of Parkinson’s Disease: A Case‑Control Study in Japan. Eur. J. Neurol. 2012, 19, 681–688. [CrossRef]
157. Bohnen, J.L.B.; Albin, R.L.; Bohnen, N.I. Ketogenic Interventions in Mild Cognitive Impairment, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Parkin‑
son’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Critical Appraisal. Front. Neurol. 2023, 14, 1123290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Norwitz, N.G.; Hu, M.T.; Clarke, K. The Mechanisms by Which the Ketone Body D‑β‑Hydroxybutyrate May Improve the Mul‑
tiple Cellular Pathologies of Parkinson’s Disease. Front. Nutr. 2019, 6, 63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Grammatikopoulou, M.G.; Tousinas, G.; Balodimou, C.; Anastasilakis, D.A.; Gkiouras, K.; Dardiotis, E.; Evangeliou, A.E.; Bog‑
danos, D.P.; Goulis, D.G. Ketogenic Therapy for Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Synthesis without Meta‑Analysis
of Animal and Human Trials. Maturitas 2022, 163, 46–61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
160. Tidman, M.M.; White, D.; White, T. Effects of an Low Carbohydrate/Healthy Fat/Ketogenic Diet on Biomarkers of Health and
Symptoms, Anxiety and Depression in Parkinson’s Disease: A Pilot Study. Neurodegener. Dis. Manag. 2022, 12, 57–66. [CrossRef]
161. Krikorian, R.; Shidler, M.D.; Summer, S.S.; Sullivan, P.G.; Duker, A.P.; Isaacson, R.S.; Espay, A.J. Nutritional Ketosis for Mild
Cognitive Impairment in Parkinson’s Disease: A Controlled Pilot Trial. Clin. Park. Relat. Disord. 2019, 1, 41–47. [CrossRef]
162. Corley, J. Adherence to the MIND Diet Is Associated with 12‑Year All‑Cause Mortality in Older Adults. Public Health Nutr. 2022,
25, 358–367. [CrossRef]
163. Kheirouri, S.; Alizadeh, M. MIND Diet and Cognitive Performance in Older Adults: A Systematic Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci.
Nutr. 2022, 62, 8059–8077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Metcalfe‑Roach, A.; Yu, A.C.; Golz, E.; Cirstea, M.; Sundvick, K.; Kliger, D.; Foulger, L.H.; Mackenzie, M.; Finlay, B.B.; Appel‑
Cresswell, S. MIND and Mediterranean Diets Associated with Later Onset of Parkinson’s Disease. Mov. Disord. 2021, 36, 977–984.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Fox, D.J.; Park, S.J.; Mischley, L.K. Comparison of Associations between MIND and Mediterranean Diet Scores with Patient‑
Reported Outcomes in Parkinson’s Disease. Nutrients 2022, 14, 5185. [CrossRef]
166. Orlich, M.J.; Singh, P.N.; Sabaté, J.; Jaceldo‑Siegl, K.; Fan, J.; Knutsen, S.; Beeson, W.L.; Fraser, G.E. Vegetarian Dietary Patterns
and Mortality in Adventist Health Study 2. JAMA Intern. Med. 2013, 173, 1230–1238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. McCarty, M.F. Does a Vegan Diet Reduce Risk for Parkinson’s Disease? Med. Hypotheses 2001, 57, 318–323. [CrossRef]
168. Tresserra‑Rimbau, A.; Thompson, A.S.; Bondonno, N.; Jennings, A.; Kühn, T.; Cassidy, A. Plant‑Based Dietary Patterns and
Parkinson’s Disease: A Prospective Analysis of the UK Biobank. Mov. Disord. 2023, 38, 1994–2004. [CrossRef]
169. Zheng, X.; Liu, J.; Wang, S.; Xiao, Y.; Jiang, Q.; Li, C.; Shang, H. Total Physical Activity, Plant‑Based Diet and Neurodegenerative
Diseases: A Prospective Cohort Study of the UK Biobank. Park. Relat. Disord. 2024, 128, 107125. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
27 of 28
170. Hegelmaier, T.; Lebbing, M.; Duscha, A.; Tomaske, L.; Tönges, L.; Holm, J.B.; Bjørn Nielsen, H.; Gatermann, S.G.; Przuntek, H.;
Haghikia, A. Interventional Influence of the Intestinal Microbiome Through Dietary Intervention and Bowel Cleansing Might
Improve Motor Symptoms in Parkinson’s Disease. Cells 2020, 9, 376. [CrossRef]
171. McCarty, M.F.; Lerner, A. Perspective: Low Risk of Parkinson’s Disease in Quasi‑Vegan Cultures May Reflect GCN2‑Mediated
Upregulation of Parkin. Adv. Nutr. 2021, 12, 355–362. [CrossRef]
172. Gao, X.; Chen, H.; Fung, T.T.; Logroscino, G.; Schwarzschild, M.A.; Hu, F.B.; Ascherio, A. Prospective Study of Dietary Pattern
and Risk of Parkinson Disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 86, 1486–1494. [CrossRef]
173. Baroni, L.; Bonetto, C.; Tessan, F.; Goldin, D.; Cenci, L.; Magnanini, P.; Zuliani, G. Pilot Dietary Study with Normoproteic
Protein‑Redistributed Plant‑Food Diet and Motor Performance in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease. Nutr. Neurosci. 2011, 14, 1–9.
[CrossRef]
174. Kanazawa, K.; Sakakibara, H. High Content of Dopamine, a Strong Antioxidant, in Cavendish Banana. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2000,
48, 844–848. [CrossRef]
175. Briguglio, M.; Dell’Osso, B.; Panzica, G.; Malgaroli, A.; Banfi, G.; Zanaboni Dina, C.; Galentino, R.; Porta, M. Dietary Neurotrans‑
mitters: A Narrative Review on Current Knowledge. Nutrients 2018, 10, 591. [CrossRef]
176. Rabey, J.M.; Vered, Y.; Shabtai, H.; Graff, E.; Harsat, A.; Korczyn, A.D. Broad Bean (Vicia faba) Consumption and Parkinson’s
Disease. Adv. Neurol. 1993, 60, 681–684. [PubMed]
177. Ramírez‑Moreno, J.M.; Salguero Bodes, I.; Romaskevych, O.; Duran‑Herrera, M.C. Broad Bean (Vicia faba) Consumption and
Parkinson’s Disease: A Natural Source of L‑Dopa to Consider. Neurologia 2015, 30, 375–376. [CrossRef]
178. Rabey, J.M.; Vered, Y.; Shabtai, H.; Graff, E.; Korczyn, A.D. Improvement of Parkinsonian Features Correlate with High Plasma
Levodopa Values after Broad Bean (Vicia faba) Consumption. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 1992, 55, 725–727. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
179. Burbano, C.; Cuadrado, C.; Muzquiz, M.; Cubero, J.I. Variation of Favism‑Inducing Factors (Vicine, Convicine and L‑DOPA)
during Pod Development in Vicia faba L. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 1995, 47, 265–275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Khalil, A.H.; Mansour, E.H. The Effect of Cooking, Autoclaving and Germination on the Nutritional Quality of Faba Beans. Food
Chemistry 1995, 54, 177–182. [CrossRef]
181. Ladha, S.S.; Walker, R.; Shill, H.A. Case of Neuroleptic Malignant‑like Syndrome Precipitated by Abrupt Fava Bean Discontinu‑
ance. Mov. Disord. 2005, 20, 630–631. [CrossRef]
182. SM, M.M.; Golshani, B. Simultaneous Determination of Levodopa and Carbidopa from Fava Bean, Green Peas and Green Beans
by High Performance Liquid Gas Chromatography. J. Clin. Diagn. Res. 2013, 7, 1004–1007. [CrossRef]
183. Sarrafchi, A.; Bahmani, M.; Shirzad, H.; Rafieian‑Kopaei, M. Oxidative Stress and Parkinson’s Disease: New Hopes in Treatment
with Herbal Antioxidants. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2016, 22, 238–246. [CrossRef]
184. Rijntjes, M. Knowing Your Beans in Parkinson’s Disease: A Critical Assessment of Current Knowledge about Different Beans
and Their Compounds in the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease and in Animal Models. Park. Dis. 2019, 2019, 1349509. [CrossRef]
185. Umezawa, H.; Tobe, H.; Shibamoto, N.; Nakamura, F.; Nakamura, K. Isolation of Isoflavones Inhibiting DOPA Decarboxylase
from Fungi and Streptomyces. J. Antibiot. 1975, 28, 947–952. [CrossRef]
186. Nagashima, Y.; Kondo, T.; Sakata, M.; Koh, J.; Ito, H. Effects of Soybean Ingestion on Pharmacokinetics of Levodopa and Motor
Symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease‑‑In Relation to the Effects of Mucuna pruriens. J. Neurol. Sci. 2016, 361, 229–234. [CrossRef]
187. Wolz, M.; Schleiffer, C.; Klingelhöfer, L.; Schneider, C.; Proft, F.; Schwanebeck, U.; Reichmann, H.; Riederer, P.; Storch, A.
Comparison of Chocolate to Cacao‑Free White Chocolate in Parkinson’s Disease: A Single‑Dose, Investigator‑Blinded, Placebo‑
Controlled, Crossover Trial. J. Neurol. 2012, 259, 2447–2451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Zahra, W.; Birla, H.; Singh, S.S.; Rathore, A.S.; Dilnashin, H.; Singh, R.; Keshri, P.K.; Gautam, P.; Singh, S.P. Neuroprotection by
Mucuna pruriens in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Neurochem. Res. 2022, 47, 1816–1829. [CrossRef]
189. Lieu, C.A.; Kunselman, A.R.; Manyam, B.V.; Venkiteswaran, K.; Subramanian, T. A Water Extract of Mucuna pruriens Provides
Long‑Term Amelioration of Parkinsonism with Reduced Risk for Dyskinesias. Park. Relat. Disord. 2010, 16, 458–465. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
190. Rai, S.N.; Chaturvedi, V.K.; Singh, P.; Singh, B.K.; Singh, M.P. Mucuna pruriens in Parkinson’s and in Some Other Diseases:
Recent Advancement and Future Prospective. 3 Biotech 2020, 10, 522. [CrossRef]
191. Sakata, M.; Miyamoto, K.; Koh, J.; Nagashima, Y.; Kondo, T.; Ito, H. Japanese Mucuna pruriens (Hasshou Beans) Showed Fast‑
Acting and Long‑Lasting Effects in Parkinson’s Disease. Intern. Med. 2024, 63, 2773–2779. [CrossRef]
192. Katzenschlager, R.; Evans, A.; Manson, A.; Patsalos, P.N.; Ratnaraj, N.; Watt, H.; Timmermann, L.; Van der Giessen, R.; Lees, A.J.
Mucuna pruriens in Parkinson’s Disease: A Double Blind Clinical and Pharmacological Study. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
2004, 75, 1672–1677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Cilia, R.; Laguna, J.; Cassani, E.; Cereda, E.; Pozzi, N.G.; Isaias, I.U.; Contin, M.; Barichella, M.; Pezzoli, G. Mucuna pruriens in
Parkinson Disease: A Double‑Blind, Randomized, Controlled, Crossover Study. Neurology 2017, 89, 432–438. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514

Foods 2026, 15, 514
28 of 28
194. Cilia, R.; Laguna, J.; Cassani, E.; Cereda, E.; Raspini, B.; Barichella, M.; Pezzoli, G. Daily Intake of Mucuna pruriens in Advanced
Parkinson’s Disease: A 16‑Week, Noninferiority, Randomized, Crossover, Pilot Study. Park. Relat. Disord. 2018, 49, 60–66.
[CrossRef]
195. Caronni, S.; Del Sorbo, F.; Barichella, M.; Fothergill‑Misbah, N.; Denne, T.; Laguna, J.; Urasa, S.; Dekker, M.C.J.; Akpalu, A.; Sarfo,
F.S.; et al. Mucuna pruriens to Treat Parkinson’s Disease in Low‑Income Countries: Recommendations and Practical Guidelines
from the Farmer to Clinical Trials. Paving the Way for Future Use in Clinical Practice. Park. Relat. Disord. 2024, 124, 106983.
[CrossRef]
196. Siddhuraju, P.; Vijayakumari, K.; Janardhanan, K. Chemical Composition and Protein Quality of the Little‑Known Legume,
Velvet Bean (Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC.). J. Agric. Food Chem. 1996, 44, 2636–2641. [CrossRef]
197. Manyam, B.V.; Dhanasekaran, M.; Hare, T.A. Neuroprotective Effects of the Antiparkinson Drug Mucuna pruriens. Phytother.
Res. 2004, 18, 706–712. [CrossRef]
198. Prakash, D.; Niranjan, A.; Tewari, S.K. Some Nutritional Properties of the Seeds of Three Mucuna Species. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr.
2001, 52, 79–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
199. Rachsee, A.; Chiranthanut, N.; Kunnaja, P.; Sireeratawong, S.; Khonsung, P.; Chansakaow, S.; Panthong, A. Mucuna pruriens (L.)
DC. Seed Extract Inhibits Lipopolysaccharide‑Induced Inflammatory Responses in BV2 Microglial Cells. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2021,
267, 113518. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Lennernäs, H.; Nilsson, D.; Aquilonius, S.M.; Ahrenstedt, O.; Knutson, L.; Paalzow, L.K. The Effect of L‑Leucine on the Absorp‑
tion of Levodopa, Studied by Regional Jejunal Perfusion in Man. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 1993, 35, 243–250. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Simon, N.; Gantcheva, R.; Bruguerolle, B.; Viallet, F. The Effects of a Normal Protein Diet on Levodopa Plasma Kinetics in
Advanced Parkinson’s Disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 2004, 10, 137–142. [CrossRef]
202. Bracco, F.; Malesani, R.; Saladini, M.; Battistin, L. Protein Redistribution Diet and Antiparkinsonian Response to Levodopa. Eur.
Neurol. 1991, 31, 68–71. [CrossRef]
203. Astarloa, R.; Mena, M.A.; Sánchez, V.; de la Vega, L.; de Yébenes, J.G. Clinical and Pharmacokinetic Effects of a Diet Rich in
Insoluble Fiber on Parkinson Disease. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 1992, 15, 375–380. [CrossRef]
204. Pincus, J.H.; Barry, K.M. Plasma Levels of Amino Acids Correlate with Motor Fluctuations in Parkinsonism. Arch. Neurol. 1987,
44, 1006–1009. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
205. Spillantini, M.G.; Schmidt, M.L.; Lee, V.M.; Trojanowski, J.Q.; Jakes, R.; Goedert, M. Alpha‑Synuclein in Lewy Bodies. Nature
1997, 388, 839–840. [CrossRef]
206. Morris, H.R.; Spillantini, M.G.; Sue, C.M.; Williams‑Gray, C.H. The Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s Disease.
Lancet 2024,
403, 293–304. [CrossRef]
207. Dias, V.; Junn, E.; Mouradian, M.M. The Role of Oxidative Stress in Parkinson’s Disease. J. Park. Dis. 2013, 3, 461–491. [CrossRef]
208. Guo, J.‑D.; Zhao, X.; Li, Y.; Li, G.‑R.; Liu, X.‑L. Damage to Dopaminergic Neurons by Oxidative Stress in Parkinson’s Disease
(Review). Int. J. Mol. Med. 2018, 41, 1817–1825. [CrossRef]
209. Lucchesi, M.; Biso, L.; Bonaso, M.; Longoni, B.; Buchignani, B.; Battini, R.; Santorelli, F.M.; Doccini, S.; Scarselli, M. Mitochondrial
Dysfunction in Genetic and Non‑Genetic Parkinson’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025, 26, 4451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Subramaniam, S.R.; Chesselet, M.‑F. Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Oxidative Stress in Parkinson’s Disease. Prog. Neurobiol.
2013, 106–107, 17–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Navarro‑Romero, A.; Montpeyó, M.; Martinez‑Vicente, M. The Emerging Role of the Lysosome in Parkinson’s Disease. Cells
2020, 9, 2399. [CrossRef]
212. Dehay, B.; Martinez‑Vicente, M.; Caldwell, G.A.; Caldwell, K.A.; Yue, Z.; Cookson, M.R.; Klein, C.; Vila, M.; Bezard, E. Lysosomal
Impairment in Parkinson’s Disease. Mov. Disord. 2013, 28, 725–732. [CrossRef]
213. Bellucci, A.; Mercuri, N.B.; Venneri, A.; Faustini, G.; Longhena, F.; Pizzi, M.; Missale, C.; Spano, P. Review: Parkinson’s Disease:
From Synaptic Loss to Connectome Dysfunction. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 2016, 42, 77–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual au‑
thor(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods15030514
