

Citation: Lu, L.; Tibpromma, S.;
Karunarathna, S.C.; Jayawardena,
R.S.; Lumyong, S.; Xu, J.; Hyde, K.D.
Comprehensive Review of Fungi on
Coffee. Pathogens 2022, 11, 411.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
pathogens11040411
Academic Editor: Dov Prusky
Received: 17 February 2022
Accepted: 22 March 2022
Published: 28 March 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
pathogens
Review
Comprehensive Review of Fungi on Coffee
Li Lu 1,2,3,4
, Saowaluck Tibpromma 4
, Samantha C. Karunarathna 4
, Ruvishika S. Jayawardena 2
,
Saisamorn Lumyong 5,6,7
, Jianchu Xu 8,9
and Kevin D. Hyde 1,2,5,*
1
Innovative Institute of Plant Health, Zhong Kai University, Guangzhou 510550, China;
6371105004@lamduan.mfu.ac.th
2
Center of Excellence in Fungal Research, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand;
ruvishika.jay@mfu.ac.th
3
School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand
4
Center for Yunnan Plateau Biological Resources Protection and Utilization, College of Biological Resource and
Food Engineering, Qujing Normal University, Qujing 655011, China; saowaluckfai@gmail.com (S.T.);
samanthakarunarathna@gmail.com (S.C.K.)
5
Research Center of Microbial Diversity and Sustainable Utilization, Chiang Mai University,
Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand; scboi009@gmail.com
6
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand
7
Academy of Science, The Royal Society of Thailand, Bangkok 10300, Thailand
8
Center for Mountain Futures, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Kunming 650201, China; jxu@mail.kib.ac.cn
9
CIFOR-ICRAF China Country Program, World Agroforestry Centre, Kunming 650201, China
*
Correspondence: kdhyde3@gmail.com
Abstract: Coffee is grown in more than 80 countries as a cash crop and consumed worldwide as
a beverage and food additive. It is susceptible to fungal infection during growth, processing and
storage. Fungal infections, in particular, can seriously affect the quality of coffee and threaten human
health. The data for this comprehensive review were collected from the United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (USDA ARS) website and published papers. This review
lists the fungal species reported on coffee based on taxonomy, life mode, host, affected plant part
and region. Five major fungal diseases and mycotoxin-producing species (post-harvest diseases of
coffee) are also discussed. Furthermore, we address why coffee yield and quality are affected by
fungi and propose methods to control fungal infections to increase coffee yield and improve quality.
Endophytic fungi and their potential as biological control agents of coffee disease are also discussed.
Keywords: endophytes; fungal diseases; fungal toxins; pathogens; postharvest diseases
1. Introduction
Coffee has gained in popularity in modern times and is the second-best-selling bev-
erage in the world [1]. As an important economic crop, it is central to the livelihoods of
millions of people worldwide [2]; accordingly, more than 80 countries grow coffee and some
countries use coffee as a major cash crop [3]. World coffee production for 2020/2021 is fore-
cast to be 5.5 million kg higher than the previous year, reaching a record 176.1 million kg [4].
Brazil is the largest exporter of coffee, and its exports account for one-third of the global
total [5]. The Agricultural Trade Ofﬁce in Sao Paulo (ATO) forecasts the Brazilian coffee
production for 2020/2021 at a record of 67.9 million kg, an increase of 15% over 2019 output.
Finland is the largest per capita consumer of coffee, while China consumes the most coffee
by volume [6]. Coffea arabica and C. canephora (robusta) are the two most-grown coffee
species in the world [7], accounting for 60% and 40% of global production, respectively [8].
Throughout the tropics, coffee growers face many problems in agricultural produc-
tion [9]. As a climate-sensitive plant, implications of climate change have altered coffee
production, from decreasing crop yield and quality to increasing fungal diseases and inva-
sive pests [10]. Coffee worldwide suffers from a range of pests and diseases, and fungal
Pathogens 2022, 11, 411. https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens11040411
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pathogens

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
2 of 17
infections are also a major problem [11]. Coffee roots, stems, leaves and beans are often
damaged by pests and pathogens [12].
Fungi on coffee occur in different life modes: endophytes, pathogens and saprobes [13–15].
The largest number of fungi have been recorded from C. arabica and C. canephora (Table S1).
Endophytes usually live inside the host without causing injury or obvious symptoms, and
this association can provide a better living environment for both the host and fungus [16].
There are also reports on their ability to aid in the defense of host plants [17,18]. Huang
et al. [19] screened potential antagonistic endophytes that prevent and control post-harvest
diseases. Coffee easily can be infected by pathogenic fungi when growing, during post-
harvest handling and storage, and during processing [20]. One of the most virulent diseases
is ‘coffee rust’ caused by Hemileia vastatrix, which wiped out coffee 150 years ago and con-
tinues to cause problems in coffee plantations worldwide [21,22]. Fungal diseases in coffee
can be divided into two types: diseases in pre-harvest and diseases in post-harvest [23,24].
Many post-harvest coffee pathogens are infected shortly before harvest, are generally
not found at harvest, and feature low activity; moreover, poor storage conditions during
post-harvest favour their development [23]. Fungal invasions before harvest are mainly
induced by the interaction between the plant host and other organisms (such as insects),
while fungal infections after harvest are controlled by nutrient availability, temperature,
humidity and biological factors (insects) [25]. Another pathway is that endophytic fungi in
coffee beans change their life modes to saprobic/pathogenic after the beans are harvested,
becoming postharvest pathogens [19,26]. Most postharvest fungi produce toxins as sec-
ondary metabolites viz ochratoxin-A, which is a mycotoxin mainly produced as a result
of secondary metabolism of many species of Aspergillus and Penicillium and is the most
common mycotoxin present in agricultural commodities [27]. Toxin-producing fungi can
be isolated from coffee beans both pre-harvest and post-harvest, while the risk of fungal
growth and mycotoxin production after harvest is higher in high temperature areas [28,29].
These toxins can cause host infections and reduce coffee bean quality [30] and can be
carcinogenic, hepatotoxic, hematotoxic, nephrotoxic and neurotoxic for humans [31,32].
Silva et al. [33] isolated ochratoxin-A from damaged coffee beans, and ochratoxin-A was
shown to cause coffee quality and yield losses. Studies have shown that the main toxigenic
fungal genera comprise Aspergillus, Penicillium and Fusarium, which are natural coffee
contaminants [34], and they can infect hosts in both farms and warehouses [35].
In our review, 966 fungal records belonging to 113 genera and 648 species found on
coffee are reported (Table S1). The purpose of this review is to discuss the fungal taxa
reported on coffee based on taxonomy, life mode, host, affected plant part and region, and
also discuss the roles of endophytes. In addition, this review provides a comprehensive up-
to-date list of coffee fungi found worldwide and proposes recommendations for preventing
fungal pathogen infections. This review provides (1) preliminary information on coffee
fungi, (2) summarizes the main factors of coffee loss, and (3) suggestions for improving
coffee yield and quality.
2. Results
2.1. Records of Coffee Fungi
A total of 966 records of coffee fungi (Supplementary Table S1) were found in the
literatures, belonging to 113 genera of which frequently found families and genera are
shown in Figure 1a and Supplementary Table S2.

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
3 of 17
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 1. (a) Percentages of different fungal families reported on coffee; (b) Percentages of different
life modes of fungi reported on coffee; (c) Percentages of coffee pathogens reported in different countries;
(d) Percentages of most frequently reported fungal pathogenic and toxigenic fungal genera on coffee.
Out of 648 fungal species, 295 are pathogenic, 138 are endophytes, and 30 are saprobes,
while the life modes of 159 species have not been conﬁrmed and another 26 species are
post-harvest disease causing agents that can produce mycotoxins in dried and green coffee
beans (Figure 1a,b). It was not conﬁrmed in reported publications whether most reported
pathogens caused pre-harvest or post-harvest infections. Of the 295 species of pathogens,
212 species are true pathogens (TP), three species are post-harvest pathogens (PP) and
four species are both true pathogens (TP) and post-harvest pathogens (PP), while the
other 76 species are listed as unknown (UNK) as their disease symptoms have not been
conﬁrmed on coffee (Supplementary Table S4).
2.2. Endophyte Role in Coffee Plants
Endophytic fungi that can inhibit nematodes, coffee berry borers and pathogenic fungi
have the potential to be used as biocontrol agents to control pest and pathogen infections
of coffee [36–38]. Goates et al. [39] showed that some endophytic fungi reduce fungal
diseases by producing volatile organic compounds that can kill or inhibit phytopathogens.
Monteiro et al. [40] demonstrated that volatile organic compounds produced by the en-
dophyte Muscodor coffeanum isolated from C. arabica produce fungicidal activity against
Aspergillus ochraceus. Three records of Muscodor species belonging to induratiaceae [41]
were found in coffee according to our data. De Almeida et al. [42] isolated Aspergillus sp.,
A. westerdijkiae, A. niger, A. tamari, and A. fumigatus, Lichtheimia ramosa and Rhizopus oryzae
from coffee beans to test their abilities to inhibit the growth of Aspergillus species and
ochratoxin-A production, and A. niger showed the best inhibitory ability of both growth
and ochratoxin-A production. According to our results, Aspergillaceae is the most fre-
quently found family in coffee. Furthermore, Eida et al. [43] isolated Penicillium crustosum,
Penicillium verruculosum, Trichoderma harzianum, and Hypocrea lixii from coffee residue
compost that can aid in the degradation of lignocellulose waste.

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
4 of 17
2.3. Pathogen Effect on Coffee and Coffee Disease
Among 648 species, fungal pathogens are the most common (295 species) as shown
in Figure 1b. According to Supplementary Tables S1 and S3: Sixty-eight of Colletotrichum
belonging to 35 species have been reported. Coffee production is often affected by Coffee
Berry Disease, which is the main factor limiting the production of C. arabica in Kenya and
other countries in East Africa, especially in high-altitude areas. It is potentially responsible
for 50 to 80% of total crop losses [44]. Forty-nine Fusarium belonging to 23 species have been
reported (Supplementary Tables S1 and S3). Fusarium species are one of the most important
phytopathogenic and toxin-producing fungi [45]. Coffee Wilt Disease is a devastating
disease in East and Central Africa [46]. Coffee Wilt Disease is a vascular disease, and due
to its high transmission potential, Coffee Wilt Disease poses a threat to all coffee-producing
regions. This disease can kill its host at all ages in a short time [47]. Moreover, after the
infected trees and their roots are removed, the infested soil may remain infectious for
several years [48]. Twenty-one Hemileia have been reported belonging to two species, and
Hemileia vastatrix is an important phytopathogenic fungus that causes Coffee Leaf Rust.
Coffee Leaf Rust, one of the major diseases of Arabica coffee is a major threat to coffee
production worldwide and it has been reported to cause serious economic losses in more
than 50 coffee-growing countries [49]. Brown Eye Spot or Cercospora Blotch caused by
Cercospora coffeicola, has been reported on coffee. Besides, Andrade et al. [50] showed that
isolates producing brown eye spot and black spot can also cause prompt alterations in the
antioxidant metabolism of coffee leaves. Armillaria root rot caused by Armillaria sp., has
been reported on coffee, and this disease leads to coffee plant rot and the eventual death of
the plant. Since this fungus invades deeper into roots, symptoms are difﬁcult to detect, thus
it can last for several years before symptoms appear on the surface. This disease spreads to
other plants with the transfer of soil [51]. Major coffee diseases that have a huge impact on
coffee plantations worldwide are discussed in detail below [14].
2.3.1. Detection and Identiﬁcation of Diseases
Detection and identiﬁcation of fungal diseases in crops can be done through direct and
indirect methods. Direct detection of fungal diseases includes molecular and serological
methods, while indirect methods identify the plant diseases through various parameters
such as morphological change, temperature change, transpiration rate change, and volatile
organic compounds released by infected plants [52]. Among different methods, fungal mor-
phology is a commonly used method to identify coffee pathogens [11], while pathogenicity
tests [53] and Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) [54] are also used. Generally, three main
methods are used for the identiﬁcation of coffee fungal pathogens.
Fungal morphological characteristics—Different fungal pathogens cause different
symptoms on the host surface [14]. Firstly, the disease symptoms on the host are observed
and recorded, and then the pure cultures grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) are obtained
according to the isolation method of Senanayake et al. [55]. Finally, colony size, colour of
the conidial masses and zonation, size, and shape of conidia harvested from the cultures
are recorded under the microscope [44].
Pathogenicity test (Koch’s postulates)—Spore suspensions of pathogenic fungi are
obtained by pure cultures grown on PDA for 7 to 10 days, prepare healthy/disease-free
hosts, then carry out the pathogenicity test [44]. After inoculation, the changes are recorded
from 1 to 15 days of growth, compare the morphological characteristics of the lesions in the
host with original disease lesions.
Polymerase Chain Reaction—Pure cultures of pathogenic fungi grown on PDA for
7 to 10 days are used to scrape mycelium from the culture surface. Then, the genomic DNA
is extracted using a Genomic DNA Extraction Kit or CTAB. Finally, PCR ampliﬁcation is
done for the speciﬁc genes of interest [44].

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
5 of 17
2.3.2. Coffee Leaf Rust
•
Pathogen: Hemileia vastatrix has spread to all coffee cultivation areas worldwide.
Hemileia coffeicola is restricted to central and western Africa, especially in higher and
cooler regions [22,56].
•
Hosts: C. arabica (arabica coffee) and C. canephora (robusta coffee), the two most
important commercial coffee species [56].
•
Symptoms and signs: Infection occurs on the leaves of coffee. The ﬁrst observable
symptoms are small, and light-yellow spots on the upper surface of leaves. As the
diameter of these points gradually increases, a large number of orange urediniospores
(=uredospores) appear under the leaf surface. The fungus forms spores through
stomata instead of penetrating the epidermis like most rust-causing species, so it
does not form many typical rust pustules. Powdery lesions under leaves appear
orange-yellow to red-orange with a high degree of variance. Although disease spots
can develop anywhere on the leaf, they tend to concentrate around the edges, where
dew and raindrops gather. The center of the spot eventually dries out and turns
brown, while edges of the lesions continue to expand and produce new spores. At the
beginning of the season, the disease usually ﬁrst appears on the lower branches, and
infection progresses slowly up the tree. Infected leaves fall prematurely, leaving long
branches without leaves [14,56–59].
•
Pathogen biology: Hemileia vastatrix mainly exists in the form of dikaryotic, and
nutrient-absorbing mycelium between cells in leaves of its coffee host. Short pedicels
are clustered throughout stomata and below leaves, with dual-nucleated spores. To-
wards the end of the season, sometimes under cool, dry conditions, spores are pro-
duced from polyspores on older attached leaves. After nuclear division and meiosis,
these sporozoites germinate to produce basidia, each of which forms four haploid
sporozoites [14,56–59].
•
Disease cycle: Urediniosporic life cycle as its most important source of inoculum,
can cause infection and develop into lesions, producing more urediniospores. Spore
adhesion to the host surface, germination of urediniospores, formation of an adhesion
layer on stomata, penetration, and intercellular and intracellular colonization are
various steps of the disease cycle. The disease cycle of Coffee Leaf Rust is discussed in
Talhinhas et al. [22].
•
Disease management:
1.
Chemical control: Fungicide sprays (Epoxiconazole, Pyraclostrobin, Cyproconazole,
Hexaconazole or Cupric Fungicides) [14,22].
2.
Cultural practices: Agroforestry practices of tree-crop mixing, timely pruning, han-
dling and de-suckering, regular change of crop cycle [49].
3.
Biological practices: Pichia membranifaciens is a yeast strain isolated from soil that can
reduce the Hemileia vastatrix spore viability [59].
4.
Resistant varieties: Such as HDT (Hıbrido de Timor), Catimor and Sarchimor popula-
tions [22].
2.3.3. Coffee Berry Disease
•
Pathogen: Colletotrichum kahawae is a particularly devastating pathogen that affects de-
veloping berries, leading to berry rot and shedding before bean formation.
Colletotrichum kahawae has not been reported outside Africa or in low altitudes. Coffee
Berry Disease was ﬁrst detected and identiﬁed by McDonald in Kenya in 1922 [14].
•
Hosts: Mainly C. arabica (arabica coffee) [14].
•
Symptoms and signs: Characteristic symptoms are progressive anthracnose of young
and expanding coffee berries. Symptoms present as small water-soaked lesions that
rapidly become dark and sunken. These lesions expand, causing rot of the entire berry
under humid conditions, and pink spore masses become visible on the lesion surface.
Berries are often shed from branches at an early stage of the disease. Lesions may also
occur on young berry stalks, causing them to shed before lesions are evident on berries.

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
6 of 17
Pale, corky lesions (scab lesions) also appear on young and mature berries that are
resistant to infection. They may completely heal or remain dormant until berries ripen.
This disease also affects ripening berries, causing a ‘brown blight’ phase as typical dark,
sunken anthracnose lesions that envelop the red berries. Colletotrichum kahawae may
also infect ﬂowers under wet conditions, causing brown lesions on petals [14,58,60].
•
Pathogen biology: The fungus settles in the mature bark of coffee buds and infects flowers,
mature fruits, and leaves. Under high humidity and high temperature, conidia germinate
and form germ tubes and appendages when contacted with susceptible tissues [61].
•
Disease cycle: The Coffee Berry Disease cycle begins each year at the ﬁrst rain event
and is subsequently maintained by rain-splash dispersal and secondary inoculation
of conidia onto healthy berries in the rainy season. The disease cycle of Coffee Berry
Disease is discussed in De Silva et al. [62].
•
Disease management:
1.
Cultural practices: Shading with fruit trees and irrigation to induce early ﬂowering
to decrease the severity and all berries should be removed at the end of the planting
season to prevent them from becoming a source of inoculation for new crops [60].
2.
Biological control: Many components in the microbiota (fungi and bacteria) on coffee
trees show very high antagonistic levels and have a strong antagonistic effect on Col-
letotrichum kahawae. However, these agents have not been developed into commercial
biocontrol agents [60].
3.
Chemical control: The most economical method is to use a mixture of copper fungi-
cide (50% wettable copper chloride wettable powder 5 kg) and organic fungicide
(75% chlorothalonil wettable powder 2 kg) [14,60].
4.
Resistant varieties: Ruiru 11, Hibrido de Timor, Rume Sudan, K7, and several Cati-
mors. In Ethiopia, 37 Coffee Berry Disease resistant coffee cultivars are used [14,60].
2.3.4. Coffee Wilt Disease
•
Pathogen: Fusarium xylarioides causes wilt in Coffea excelsa (C. liberica) (Steyaert 1948).
This disease was ﬁrst detected in 1927 in Oubangui-Chari (now the Central African
Republic) and was initially thought to be caused by a root rot [14,47].
•
Hosts: C. arabica (arabica coffee), C. canephora (robusta coffee), and C. excelsa [47].
•
Symptoms and signs: First, leaves turn yellow before withering and developing brown
necrotic lesions. Finally, leaves curl, dry, and fall. This process can start from any
part of the plant, but eventually, symptoms spread to the rest of the plant. Symptoms
ﬁrst present on the coffee stem, where fungi colonize, and the host response blocks
vascular bundles, resulting in blue-black stains [14,47,58,63].
•
Pathogen biology: Conidia and ascospores are spread by wind, rain and through
human activities (harvesting, pruning). Pathogens penetrate wounds, so any agent
causing wounds aids the spread of the fungus. Krantz and Mogk in 1973 noted that
most dying and dead trees had been wounded during weeding. Insects may also
spread the disease from one tree to another tree [64].
•
Disease cycle: Incubation period from ﬁrst symptoms to death of tree varies, although
most affected trees die 2–3 months after initial symptoms were observed. It usually
quickly kills infected mature trees within just 6 months after the ﬁrst external symp-
toms appear, resulting in a decline of total yield. Coffee quality may also be affected
by premature berry ripening. The disease cycle of Coffee Wilt Disease is discussed in
Alemu et al. [65].
•
Disease management:
1.
Cultural practices: Frequent inspection, along with burning infected material and
spraying soil surfaces with 2.5% copper (II) sulphate. Replanting should not be done
until 6 months after uprooting infected trees to allow the viability of soil inoculum to
decline. It is recommended to grow cover crops such as Desmodium sp. and haricot
bean, which are very efﬁcient in suppressing weeds (so reducing the need for slashing)
and as legumes, promote the growth of coffee trees [63].

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
7 of 17
2.
Chemical control: Ridomil Gold (metalxyl 8% + Mancozeb 64%) 68% Wp 2.5 kg/ha,
when disease on set, used at 7, 14, 21, 28 days. Pencase 80% WP (Mancozeb) at the
rate of 2.5 kg/ha, when disease on set, used at 7, 14, 21 days [63].
3.
Biological control: The strain of Bacillus subtilis (AUBB20) is the most antagonistic to
this disease. Tricoderma viride and Tricoderma harzianum have shown good potential
in inhibiting the mycelial growth of Fusarium xylarioides, but no effective methods of
biological control are currently available [63].
2.3.5. Brown Eye Spot or Cercospora Blotch
•
Pathogen: Cercospora coffeicola is distributed throughout the tropics and subtropics and
is prone to appear on coffee plants in areas with higher moisture and rainfall as well
as on plants that are stressed [14,66].
•
Hosts: C. arabica (arabica coffee), C. canephora (robusta coffee) [66].
•
Symptoms and signs: on the leaves, small, round to irregular spots, and brown to
light brown lesions ﬁrst appear. The number and size of lesions then increase before
eventually the entire leaf is affected. The edge of the lesion may appear dark purple or
black, and it may be encircled by a yellow halo. Severely infected leaves turn yellow
and fall off; lesions on green berries are initially brown, sunken, longitudinal, irregular
or oval with a gray center. Infection can occur at any stage of berry growth; on the
red cherries, ﬁrst, large, sunken, and blackened areas cover with silvery fungal spores.
Penetration into the seeds may cause the pulp to stick to parchment paper during
processing, and damage the product. Cercospora coffeicola reduces productivity and
lowers the beverage quality of coffee [14,57,67].
•
Pathogen biology: Wind, splashing water and human activities cause spores (conidia)
to be deposited on leaves and petioles, beginning the disease cycle. Conidia germinate
at moderate to warm (20–28 ◦C) temperatures [68].
•
Disease cycle: In warm and humid periods, new infections and sporulation occur
every 7 to 10 days. Pathogen easily spreads in ﬁelds via wind, rain, and irrigation
water. It survives as a pathogen in weeds and infested crop fragments, where it is
capable of re-infecting grown plants. The disease cycle of Cercospora Blotch is discussed
in Souza et al. [69].
•
Disease management:
1.
Biological control: No biological control measures have been developed [68].
2.
Cultural practices: Elimination of crop debris, weed hosts and provide 35–65% shade.
In order to maintain adequate plant nutrition, nitrogen fertilizers are used. Plant
only high-quality seeds, and destroy infected crops in time after the ﬁnal harvest and
before replanting. Select a reasonable planting density (10 ft × 10 ft for robusta while
8 ft × 8 ft for arabica). Avoid planting coffee transplants too deep in soils [68].
3.
Chemical control: Fungicide sprays are necessary for disease control in wet condi-
tions, but proper fungicides, rates, and fungicide rotations such as Chlorothalonil
and Chlorothalonil Mixtures, Strobilurins and Strobilurin Mixtures should be fol-
lowed [68].
2.3.6. Armillaria Root Rot
•
Pathogen: Armillaria root rot is caused by several species of Armillaria [14].
•
Hosts: C. arabica (arabica coffee), C. canephora (robusta coffee) [14].
•
Symptoms and signs: Common symptoms of Armillaria infections include tissue death,
wilting and the yellowing of tree-tops, and resin exudation, as well as the underside
of bark, is easily attacked by white mycelium [14,58].
•
Pathogen biology: This fungus usually exists in soil, and when coffee trees grow in
unfavorable conditions, it infects the tree. For example, drought, soil compaction,
root injury, and nutrient deﬁciency may induce it to infect the coffee tree. The fungus
produces ﬁlaments on the ground, and these ﬁlaments can invade healthy roots, move

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
8 of 17
to the root collar, and spread throughout the trunk. The infection causes sapwood in
the affected area to rot and eventually kill the tree [70].
•
Disease cycle: Armillaria spreads in two ways. The ﬁrst method of transmission is
through airborne sexual spores, which can sometimes lead to the creation of new
infection centers. The second method of spread is through the growth of pathogens
from infected trees to neighboring trees via mycelial transfer at the location where the
diseased roots come into contact with each other or via rhizomes that grow through
the ground. Depending on the climate, stump size, and other factors, Armillaria can
live up to 50 years or more. The disease cycle of Armillaria root rot is discussed in
Jayawardena et al. [71].
•
Disease management: The affected trees are incurable. However, if the disease is
detected early enough, host trees can be preserved. It is important to prevent this
disease by avoiding conditions that cause the tree’s vitality to decline. As Armillaria
root rot can last for many years, avoid replanting where the diseased trees have been
removed [14,58,70].
1.
Biological control: Use antagonistic fungi to preemptively settle or eliminate Armillaria
species in coffee plants.
2.
Soil barrier: Creating a barrier in the soil to root and rhizomorph growth may be a
practical way to limit the pathogen’s spread, and this is called trenching. This is done
by digging a trench down to 1 m (about 3 ft), lining it with plastic, and backﬁlling.
3.
Chemical control: Usually after stump removal and before planting, fumigants such as
chloropicrin, carbon disulphide, and methyl bromide are used in orchards to eradicate
inocula from the soil.
2.4. Distribution of Pathogenic Fungi on Coffee Worldwide
In total, 295 pathogens have been recorded across more than 90 countries (Supplementary
Table S1, Figure 1c). The main pathogens are concentrated in Asia and Africa. Brazil has
the highest number of pathogens in our statistics.
2.5. Pathogenic and Toxigenic Fungi on Coffee
Three pathogenic and two toxigenic fungal genera are reported frequently (Figure 1d).
Aspergillus and Penicillium are the main toxin-producing fungal genera, while Colletotrichum,
Hemileia, and Fusarium are the main fungal pathogenic genera on coffee. According to our
statistics, Fusarium is a pathogen of coffee and also some species in this genus have been
reported as mycotoxin producers (Supplementary Table S5) [72].
Twenty-six of the taxa reported on coffee produce toxins viz: 20 Aspergillus, two Penicillium,
and one species from Byssochlamys, Fusarium, Mucor, and Rhizopus (Supplementary Table S5).
Fusarium species are mainly pathogenic affecting coffee causing disease and producing
toxins. The main fungal toxins reported on coffee are ochratoxin-A/ochratoxin-B, while
Aﬂatoxin B1/B2 and other mycotoxins were reported less than Ochratoxins [73]. Once
the coffee is contaminated with ochratoxin-A, it is difﬁcult to eliminate by cooking due
to its thermostability and small size molecules [74]. The accumulation of mycotoxins in
plant tissues is related to the development of plant disease symptoms [25]. Based on
Supplementary Table S5, the toxin-producing species mainly comes from Aspergillaceae.
One hundred and forty-eight records of Aspergillaceae have been reported on coffee
worldwide, but there are likely more toxin-producing taxa in this family.
3. Discussion and Conclusions
Since the diversity of plant pathogenic fungi is higher than that of plant pathogenic
bacteria and viruses, fungal diseases are responsible for the largest coffee losses world-
wide [75]. Microbial diseases cause 16% of crop (including coffee) losses worldwide, and
70–80% of these losses are caused by fungi [76]. Cerda et al. [77] showed that pests and
diseases cause high primary yield losses (26%) and even higher secondary yield losses

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
9 of 17
(38%). For instance, Coffee berry borer affects coffee yield while increasing the risk of
toxigenic fungal infections [18].
Fungal infection is a serious problem affecting coffee production and quality [78]. The
most serious fungal diseases of coffee reported are Coffee Leaf Rust, Coffee Berry Disease
and Coffee Wilt Disease, Brown Eye Spot, and root rot disease [14,58,79]. Coffee Leaf Rust
causes loss of physiological activities and leaves to fall off, coffee serves as an obligate host
for Coffee Leaf Rust, and this disease devastates susceptible coffee plantations. In severe
cases, this disease can cause branches to wither completely, weaken the plant, and hinder or
even stop its development; it can cause damage leading to severe yield losses up to 75% [49].
Usually, seriously ill and fragile coffee trees cannot survive Coffee Leaf Rust. Coffee Berry
Disease mainly occurs in C. arabica and is capable of destroying almost all berries on the
coffee tree, but it does not cause any effect on branches and leaves. This disease spreads
rapidly above 1500 m altitude under cool and humid conditions and can cause losses as
high as 80%. Coffee Wilt Disease is the most serious coffee disease on the African continent.
According to Rutherford et al. [47], since 2001, farms in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Tanzania, and Uganda have suffered from the disease, and the average yield loss
was reported at 70%. Brown Eye Spot or Cercospora “Berry Blotch” can attack coffee at any
stage, and infected plants lose most of their leaves, or even all of them in the same cases,
and berries can also be infected. This disease may result in more than 30% production loss
and can also reduce quality. Armillaria cause rots in various hosts across the world, and
coffee is one of the main known hosts. Between 5–20% of all tree deaths can be attributed
to this disease in plantations. Some diseases only manifest when plants are accidentally
injured by farming tools, especially when wounds are created at the bottom of tree trunks,
and in turn, wounds should be treated appropriately with antiseptic healing creams in
order to prevent the invasion of diseases such as Fusarium wilt and cankers [14,47,80,81].
Other less serious pathogens of coffee include Leaf Spot (Alternaria sp., and Ascochyta sp.)
and damping-off (Pythium sp.) that are managed by both chemical control and cultural
practices [82]; and Coffee Bark Disease which only appears to affect C. arabica and can be
controlled by adjusting soil pH, nutrient content and maintaining good water management
practices [11]. As coffee grows in the tropics and subtropics, leaves remain attached to the
tree throughout the year, and it is often covered in microbial endophytes that are important
for plant health and plant protection [13,83].
As society pays more attention to food safety and environmental health, it is in our
collective interest to reduce the use of pesticides in coffee plantations, and ﬁnding beneﬁcial
microorganisms and microbial-derived compounds have become a popular and important
research ﬁeld [84]. Fungicides are effective against the disease, but continuous and repeated
use of fungicides will promote the emergence of resistant populations, [85]. Moreover,
much of the existing literature indicate that fungicides are harmful to the ecosystem, and
conventional use will also bring the threat of environmental impact [86]. Additionally,
the application of fungicides may affect crop physiology through various disturbances,
such as reduced growth, disturbance of the development of reproductive organs, changes
in nitrogen and/or carbon metabolism, resulting in reduced nutrient utilization for plant
growth [87]. In addition, organic coffee production does not use pesticides. Through the
conducted field surveys in coffee plantations in Yunnan Province, China in 2020, we observed
that fungal pathogens and pests are still serious factors affecting coffee production and quality.
Different fungi play different roles in the ecosystem. Fungal endophytes and their
secondary metabolites may play important roles in the prevention and treatment of coffee
diseases. Regarding toxigenic fungi, De Almeida et al. [42] showed that endophytes from
coffee beans can inhibit fungal growth and ochratoxin-A production. Regarding Coffee
Wilt Disease, the non-pathogenic isolates of Fusarium are similar to the pathogenic isolates
that cause Coffee Wilt Disease, so they can be studied as effective biocontrol agents. If these
non-pathogenic fungal isolates produce secondary metabolites compatible with commonly
used fungicides, those secondary metabolites can reduce the severity of fungal diseases [88].
It is known that endophytic fungi can produce metal nanoparticles that have high activity

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
10 of 17
against several microbial pathogens of humans and plants [89]. The direct application of
nanoparticles to seeds, leaves or roots can prevent microbial pathogens from invading
plants, but the long-term impact of nano-formulations on human health and environmental
quality when applied to crop protection is still uncertain [90]. This method of inhibiting
pathogens is comparable to that of chemical pesticides, but applications of high amounts of
fungicides have led to the emergence of anti-Plasmodium digitatum strains [91]. Therefore,
nano-formulation is a potential application for controlling diseases. Regarding Coffee Berry
Disease, there are almost no chemicals available to control the pathogenic Colletotrichum
species [92], and its resistance is controlled by three genes, so current research on disease-
resistant breeding will likely result in methods to control the disease, but disease-resistant
breeding can take up to 30 years [93]. Regarding Coffee Leaf Rust disease is the most
serious fungal pathogen responsible for causing leaf diseases [81]. From an environmental
and economic point of view, cultivating rust-resistant species is considered the best method.
As Hemileia vastatrix complex resistance factors and excellent traits cannot be maintained,
it has not been studied as extensively as other rust fungi. The resistant varieties in the
wild C. arabica population are worth doing while, there is little hope of success in ﬁnding
a new source of resistance from wild C. arabica [22,94,95]. Jackson et al. [96] showed that
the entomopathogenic and mycoparasitic fungus Lecanicillium lecanii has potential as an
effective biological control against Hemileia vastatrix by reducing spore viability and disease
severity. Therefore, the most effective method for controlling fungal pathogens on coffee is
via the use of endophytic fungi from coffee as bio-controllers.
Mycotoxins on coffee are considered an important food safety issue. Ochratoxins-A
is one of the most important mycotoxin pollutants in agricultural products (cereals, wine,
coffee, dried fruits, beer, and animal feed). Due to its toxicity and incidence, its harm
and impact on humans and animals continue to cause global concern [97]. Penicillium
and Aspergillus species produce ochratoxins and exist in the forms denoted as A, B, and
C; ochratoxin-A is the most ubiquitous and most toxic [98]. Culliao et al. [72] isolated
Fusarium, Mucor, and Rhizopus from coffee beans that can produce ochratoxin-A. This
mycotoxin is usually found in coffee beans and grains, and it cannot be completely removed
by food processing methods because of it is light molecular weight and resistance to
heat treatments [31,32]. The production of mycotoxins depends on the degree of fungal
growth [99]. Coffee berry borer is responsible for increasing fungal contamination and
the content of ochratoxin-A [18], while green coffee beans can be contaminated by fungal
pathogens in storage [100]. Suárez-Quiroz et al. (2004) showed that different levels of
ochratoxin-A are produced during different processing stages; the percentage of infection
in green coffee is usually lower than that observed in parchment paper and dry coffee
berries, and almost no ochratoxin-A producing fungi are found in green coffee [101]. The
Commission of the European Communities has established the internationally acceptable
amount or safe amount of ochratoxin-A in food (including coffee) [102]. According to
the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 77 countries have formulated guidelines
and regulations on mycotoxins in food (including coffee) and feed to control the levels
of mycotoxins, but there are still 13 countries (including Africa) that do not have speciﬁc
regulations for food safety [103].
A range of approaches for ridding mycotoxins in food is currently in the pipeline due
to the acute and chronic toxic effects of food contamination by mycotoxins on humans and
animals [104], as detailed below:
Regarding biological control, coffee endophytes Beauveria bassiana and Clonostachys rosea
isolated by Vega et al. [36] can control coffee berry borer, the most destructive coffee pest in
the world. This plant defense mediated by endophytes can be developed as a new control
mechanism. Screening for endophytic fungi that can inhibit the production of ochratoxin-A
by post-harvest pathogens and reduce the content of ochratoxin-A in coffee beans should
be the future research directions. The use of the non-toxic Aspergillus niger strains for the
biological control of toxin-producing black aspergilli has also been successfully applied
to grapes [20]. The targeted application of biological control methods on coffee plants can

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
11 of 17
potentially increase the quality of coffee beans and ensure the safety of consumers [73]. Ap-
plication of fungal growth inhibitors to coffee beans, such as the polypeptide bacillomycin
D isolated from Bacillus cereus, can inhibit the growth of Fusarium [105].
Regarding physical control, it is known that toxins are produced by a certain level of
physical water activity (aw), nutrition, and temperature in micelle. High temperature and
humidity are conducive to the production of toxins, all of which are factors controlling the
ochratoxin-A production [73]. Various technical methods such as sun drying, infrared and
ultrasonic treatments should be used before coffee beans are stored to keep the moisture
content below 12%, as this reduces the risk of fungal growth and contaminations [106].
Since molds that produce mycotoxins can usually only colonize damaged parts of plants,
crops must be protected from damage caused by mechanical processes or insects. In
order to reduce pre-harvest pollution, minimize weeds and reduce the pressure of the
crop itself. There can be an appropriate use of fungicide and pesticide treatments [20].
Gil-Serna et al. [107] shows that optimal conditions of growth and produce ochratoxin-
A in Aspegillus steynii and A. westerdijkiae can be seen at warm temperatures (28–32 ◦C).
Therefore, coffee bean storage containers should be kept clean in a cool and dry place.
Regarding chemical control, antioxidants are a new strategy that is emerging, such as
vanillic acid or 4-hydroxybenzoic acid [108]. Essential oils extracted from plants, such as
Thymus vulgaris, Aframomum danielli [109,110], cinnamon, clove leaf [111], thyme, marigold,
spearmint, basil, quyssum, caraway, anise, oregano, mint, basil, sage, and coriander [112]
have been found to inhibit the growth of ochretoxin producing fungi. Additionally, alka-
loids produced by Piper longum, and components of sesame oil and turmeric have also
been found to suppress both fungal growth and ochratoxin production in a number of
ochratoxin-A producing aspergilli [113]. In addition, ﬂavonoids, carotenoids, and saponins
can be used as a substitute for synthetic fungicides to control fungal development and
ochratoxin-A production in coffee beans [114]. On the other hand, Gómez et al. [115]
showed that engineered silver nanoparticles can inhibit the growth of aﬂatoxigenic and
ochratoxigenic fungi. A natural component of rice bran gamma-oryzanol demonstrates
antifungal activities against Fusarium graminearum [116]. The activated chemicals in cold
plasma treatment technology can cause fungal cell damage and death, as well as mycotoxin de-
composition. Studies demonstrated that this treatment may eventually provide a sustainable
means for processing a large amount of food and animal feed, including coffee [117].
To sum up, the use of antagonistic endophytes as biological control agents has at-
tracted special attention for the management of plant diseases and has minimal impact
on the environment [118]. Endophytic fungi isolated from coffee, which produce volatile
organic compounds, are promising sources of biotechnological potential. The use of mi-
croorganisms as biocontrol agents can reduce the huge use of chemicals, and improve the
quality and sustainability of coffee, but biocontrol is still not fully utilized in the coffee
industry [119]. This comprehensive review of the fungi reported on coffee based on taxon-
omy, phylogeny, life mode, host, affected plant part and region is useful for mycologists,
pathologists, and farmers. Five major fungal diseases and mycotoxin-producing taxa are
also discussed in detail in this review. In addition, we discuss why the yield and quality
of coffee are affected by fungi and propose methods to control or eliminate infections to
increase yield and improve quality. Furthermore, endophytic fungi and their biological
control potential for coffee diseases are also discussed.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Fungal Taxa Reported on Coffee
Information on fungal taxa reported on coffee hosts was gathered via Google Scholar,
Cyberliber, theses, books, and online literature access sites, and reported fungi were
retrieved from the USDA website [120]. In addition, different life modes, hosts, and
locations as well as fungi that produce toxins were collected from published articles.

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
12 of 17
4.2. Tables of Coffee Fungi
Fungal species, genera, and higher ranks were checked and updated using Index
Fungorum [121] and MycoBank [122]. Five different tables were made in order to clearly
understand the different life modes of fungi reported on coffee. All records of coffee fungi
are listed in Supplementary Table S1. Frequently found fungal families and genera on
coffee are mentioned in Supplementary Table S2. Different life modes of coffee fungi are
listed in Supplementary Table S3. True pathogens, postharvest pathogens, and other fungi
reported on coffee are mentioned in Supplementary Table S4. Post-harvest fungal diseases
reported on coffee are listed in Supplementary Table S5.
4.3. Graphs of Coffee Fungi
Microsoft Word’s pie graph option was used to make the Figure 1. Percentages of
different fungal families reported on coffee are shown in Figure 1a. Percentages of different life
modes of fungi reported on coffee are displayed in Figure 1b. Percentages of coffee pathogens
reported in different countries are shown in Figure 1c. Percentages of most frequently reported
fungal pathogenic and toxigenic fungal genera on coffee are displayed in Figure 1d.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.339
0/pathogens11040411/s1, Table S1: Records of coffee fungi. Table S2: Frequently found fungal families
and genera on coffee. Table S3: Different life modes of coffee fungi. Table S4: True pathogens, postharvest
pathogens and other fungi reported on coffee. Table S5: Post-harvest fungal diseases reported on
coffee. References [123–143] are citied in the Supplementary Materials.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.D.H. and S.C.K.; methodology and software, L.L. and
S.C.K.; formal analysis and investigation L.L.; resources and data curation S.T.; writing—original
draft preparation L.L. and S.C.K.; writing—review and editing L.L. and S.C.K.; visualization and
supervision R.S.J., S.L. and J.X.; project administration and funding acquisition K.D.H., S.C.K. and
S.T.; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by “National Research Council of Thailand, grant for new
researcher NRCT5-TRG630010-01, entitled “Biodiversity, taxonomy, phylogeny, and evolution of
Colletotrichum in northern Thailand”, Thailand Research Fund for the grant “Impact of climate change
on fungal diversity and biogeography in the Greater Mekong Subregion, grant number RDG6130001”
and the “Department of Sciences and Technology of Yunnan Provincial Government, China”, grant
number 202101AS070045.
Data Availability Statement: Main reference website https://www.ars.usda.gov/ (accessed on
16 February 2022) for the list of coffee fungi.
Acknowledgments: Li Lu thanks the Center for Mountain Futures, Kunming Institute of Botany,
Chinese Academy of Science, and Center of Excellence in Fungal Research and Qujing Normal
University for providing facilities for the Ph.D. studies and, she also thanks Mae Fah Luang University
for providing the postgraduate scholarship for tuition fees. K.D. Hyde thanks Chiang Mai University
for the award of Visiting Professor.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Besttoppers. Available online: https://besttoppers.com/top-10-widely-consumed-drinks (accessed on 16 February 2022).
2.
Zhang, S.J.; De Bruyn, F.; Pothakos, V.; Contreras, G.F.; Cai, Z.; Moccand, C.; Weckx, S.; De Vuyst, L. Inﬂuence of various processing
parameters on the microbial community dynamics, metabolomic proﬁles, and cup quality during wet coffee processing. Front.
Microbiol. 2019, 10, 2621. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Treanor, N.B.; Saunders, J. Tackling (Illegal) Deforestation in Coffee Supply Chains: What Impact Can Demand-Side Regulations Have?
Forest Policy Trade and Finance Initiative Report; Forest Trends: Washington, DC, USA, 2021.
4.
International Coffee Organization. Available online: http://www.ico.org/coffee_prices.asp (accessed on 16 February 2022).
5.
Veloso, T.G.R.; Silva, M.D.C.S.D.; Cardoso, W.S.; Guarçoni, R.C.; Kasuya, M.C.M.; Pereira, L.L. Effects of environmental factors on
microbiota of fruits and soil of Coffea arabica in Brazil. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Coffee Consumption by Country 2022.
Available online: https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/coffee-
consumption-by-country (accessed on 16 February 2022).

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
13 of 17
7.
Vega, F.E.; Ziska, L.H.; Simpkins, A.; Infante, F.; Davis, A.P.; Rivera, J.A.; Barnaby, J.Y.; Wolf, J. Early growth phase and caffeine
content response to recent and projected increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide in coffee (Coffea arabica and C. canephora). Sci.
Rep. 2020, 10, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Leitão, A.L. Occurrence of ochratoxin A in coffee: Threads and solutions—A mini-review. Beverages 2019, 5, 36. [CrossRef]
9.
Harvey, C.A.; Rakotobe, Z.L.; Rao, N.S.; Dave, R.; Razaﬁmahatratra, H.; Rabarijohn, R.H.; Rajaofara, H.; MacKinnon, J.L. Extreme
vulnerability of smallholder farmers to agricultural risks and climate change in Madagascar. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2014,
369, 20130089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Pham, Y.; Reardon-Smith, K.; Mushtaq, S.; Cockﬁeld, G. The impact of climate change and variability on coffee production: A
systematic review. Clim. Chang. 2019, 156, 609–630. [CrossRef]
11.
Rutherford, M.A.; Phiri, N. Pests and Diseases of Coffee in Eastern Africa: A Technical and Advisory Manual; CAB International:
Wallingford, UK, 2006.
12.
Ribeyre, F.; Avelino, J. Impact of ﬁeld pests and diseases on coffee quality. In Specialty Coffee: Managing Coffee; International Plant
Nutrition Institute; IPNI [Southeast Asia]: Penang, Malaysia, 2012; pp. 151–176.
13.
Santamaría, J.; Bayman, P. Fungal epiphytes and endophytes of coffee leaves (Coffea arabica). Microb. Ecol. 2005, 50, 1–8. [CrossRef]
14.
Muller, R.A.; Berry, D.; Avelino, J.; Bieysse, D. Coffee diseases. In Coffee: Growing, Processing, Sustainable Production. A Guidebook
for Growers, Processors, Traders and Researchers; Germany Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.: Weinheim, Germany, 2009; pp. 495–549.
15.
Botrel, D.A.; Laborde, M.C.F.; De Medeiros, F.H.V.; Resende, M.L.V.; Júnio, P.M.R.; Pascholati, S.F.; Gusmão, L.F.P. Saprobic fungi
as biocontrol agents of halo blight (Pseudomonas syringae pv. garcae) in coffee clones. Coffee Sci. 2018, 13, 283–291. [CrossRef]
16.
Torres-Mendoza, D.; Ortega, H.E.; Cubilla-Rios, L. Patents on endophytic fungi related to secondary metabolites and biotransfor-
mation applications. J. Fungi 2020, 6, 58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Yan, L.; Zhu, J.; Zhao, X.; Shi, J.; Jiang, C.; Shao, D. Beneﬁcial effects of endophytic fungi colonization on plants. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
da Silva, S.A.; Pereira, R.G.F.A.; Lira, N.D.A.; da Glória, E.M.; Chalfoun, S.M.; Batista, L.R. Fungi associated to beans infested
with coffee berry borer and the risk of ochratoxin A. Food Control 2020, 113, 107204. [CrossRef]
19.
Huang, X.; Ren, J.; Li, P.; Feng, S.; Dong, P.; Ren, M. Potential of microbial endophytes to enhance the resistance to postharvest
diseases of fruit and vegetables. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2020, 101, 1744–1757. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Varga, J.; Kocsubé, S.; Péteri, Z.; Vagvolgyi, C.; Toth, B. Chemical, physical and biological approaches to prevent ochratoxin
induced toxicoses in humans and animals. Toxins 2010, 2, 1718–1750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
McCook, S. Global rust belt: Hemileia vastatrix and the ecological integration of world coffee production since 1850. J. Glob. Hist.
2006, 1, 177–195. [CrossRef]
22.
Talhinhas, P.; Batista, D.; Diniz, I.; Vieira, A.; Silva, D.N.; Loureiro, A.; Tavares, S.; Pereira, A.P.; Azinheira, H.G.; Guerra-
Guimarães, L. The coffee leaf rust pathogen Hemileia vastatrix: One and a half centuries around the tropics. Mol. Plant Pathol.
2017, 18, 1039–1051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Coates, L.; Johnson, G. Postharvest diseases of fruit and vegetables. In Plant Pathogens and Plant Diseases; Elsevier Science:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1997; pp. 533–548.
24.
Roberto, S.R.; Youssef, K.; Hashim, A.F.; Ippolito, A. Nanomaterials as alternative control means against postharvest diseases in
fruit crops. Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 1752. [CrossRef]
25.
Ismaiel, A.A.; Papenbrock, J. Mycotoxins: Producing fungi and mechanisms of phytotoxicity. Agriculture 2015, 5, 492–537.
[CrossRef]
26.
Strobel, G. The emergence of endophytic microbes and their biological promise. J. Fungi 2018, 4, 57. [CrossRef]
27.
Miller, J. Mycotoxin in Grain, Eagan Press: St. Paul, MA, USA, 1994; 326.
28.
Alvindia, D.G.; de Guzman, M.F. Survey of Philippine coffee beans for the presence of ochratoxigenic fungi. Mycotoxin Res. 2016,
32, 61–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Daou, R.; Joubrane, K.; Maroun, R.G.; Khabbaz, L.R.; Ismail, A.; El Khoury, A. Mycotoxins: Factors inﬂuencing production and
control strategies. AIMS Agric. Food 2021, 6, 416–447. [CrossRef]
30.
Proctor, R.H.; McCormick, S.P.; Kim, H.-S.; Cardoza, R.E.; Stanley, A.M.; Lindo, L.; Kelly, A.; Brown, D.W.; Lee, T.; Vaughan, M.M.
Evolution of structural diversity of trichothecenes, a family of toxins produced by plant pathogenic and entomopathogenic fungi.
PLoS Pathog. 2018, 14, e1006946. [CrossRef]
31.
Khan, S.A.; Venancio, E.J.; Ono, M.A.; Fernandes, E.V.; Hirooka, E.Y.; Shimizu, C.F.; Oba, A.; Flaiban, K.K.M.C.; Itano, E.N. Effects
of subcutaneous ochratoxin-A exposure on immune system of broiler chicks. Toxins 2019, 11, 264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Agriopoulou, S.; Stamatelopoulou, E.; Varzakas, T. Advances in occurrence, importance, and mycotoxin control strategies:
Prevention and detoxiﬁcation in foods. Foods 2020, 9, 137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Silva, C.F.; Schwan, R.F.; Dias, Ë.S.; Wheals, A.E. Microbial diversity during maturation and natural processing of coffee cherries
of Coffea arabica in Brazil. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2000, 60, 251–260. [CrossRef]
34.
Bokhari, F.M. Mycotoxins and toxigenic fungi in Arabic coffee beans in Saudi Arabia. Adv. Biol. Res. 2007, 1, 56–66.
35.
Rezende, E.D.F.; Borges, J.G.; Cirillo, M.; Prado, G.; Paiva, L.C.; Batista, L. Ochratoxigenic fungi associated with green coffee
beans (Coffea arabica L.) in conventional and organic cultivation in Brazil. Braz. J. Microbiol. 2013, 44, 377–384. [CrossRef]
36.
Vega, F.E.; Posada, F.; Aime, M.C.; Pava-Ripoll, M.; Infante, F.; Rehner, S.A. Entomopathogenic fungal endophytes. Biol. Control
2008, 46, 72–82. [CrossRef]

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
14 of 17
37.
Aldina, R.F.; Indarti, S.; Wibowo, A. Pathogenicity of Nematofagous Fungus for Control of Pratylenchus Coffeae Nematodes on Coffee
Plants; Springer: Cham, Germany, 2017; pp. 243–251.
38.
Schulz, B.; Boyle, C. What Are Endophytes? Microbial Root Endophytes; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006.
39.
Goates, B.J.; Mercier, J. Effect of biofumigation with volatiles from Muscodor albus on the viability of Tilletia spp. teliospores. Can.
J. Microbiol. 2009, 55, 203–206. [CrossRef]
40.
Monteiro, M.C.P.; Alves, N.M.; De Queiroz, M.V.; Pinho, D.B.; Pereira, O.L.; De Souza, S.M.C.; Cardoso, P.G. Antimicrobial
activity of endophytic fungi from coffee plants. Biosci. J. 2017, 33, 381–389. [CrossRef]
41.
Samarakoon, M.C.; Thongbai, B.; Hyde, K.D.; Broenstrup, M.; Beutling, U.; Lambert, C.; Miller, A.N.; Liu, J.K.; Promputtha,
I.; Stadler, M. Elucidation of the life cycle of the endophytic genus Muscodor and itEvaluation of the effects of temperature on
processed coffee beans in the presence of fungi and ochratoxin As transfer to Induratia in Induratiaceae fam. nov., based on a
polyphasic taxonomic approach. Fungal Divers. 2020, 101, 177–210. [CrossRef]
42.
de Almeida, Â.B.; Corrêa, I.P.; Furuie, J.L.; de Farias Pires, T.; do Rocio Dalzoto, P.; Pimentel, I.C. Inhibition of growth and
ochratoxin-A production in Aspergillus species by fungi isolated from coffee beans. Braz. J. Microbiol. 2019, 50, 1091–1098.
[CrossRef]
43.
Eida, M.F.; Nagaoka, T.; Wasaki, J.; Kouno, K. Evaluation of cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic abilities of fungi isolated from coffee
residue and sawdust composts. Microbes Environ. 2011, 26, 220–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Prihastuti, H.; Cai, L.; Chen, H.; McKenzie, E.; Hyde, K. Characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with coffee berries
in northern Thailand. Fungal Div. 2009, 39, 89–109.
45.
Ma, L.-J.; Van Der Does, H.C.; Borkovich, K.A.; Coleman, J.J.; Daboussi, M.-J.; Di Pietro, A.; Dufresne, M.; Freitag, M.; Grabherr,
M.; Henrissat, B.; et al. Comparative genomics reveals mobile pathogenicity chromosomes in Fusarium. Nature 2010, 464, 367–373.
[CrossRef]
46.
Peck, L.; Nowell, R.; Flood, J.; Ryan, M.; Barraclough, T. Historical genomics reveals the evolutionary mechanisms behind
multiple outbreaks of the host-speciﬁc coffee wilt pathogen Fusarium xylarioides. bioRxiv 2020, 22, 1–24. [CrossRef]
47.
Rutherford, M.A. Current knowledge of coffee wilt disease, a major constraint to coffee production in Africa. Phytopathology 2006,
96, 663–666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Musoli, P.C.; Cilas, C.; Pot, D.; Nabaggala, A.; Nakendo, S.; Pande, J.; Charrier, A.; Leroy, T.; Bieysse, D. Inheritance of resistance
to coffee wilt disease (Fusarium xylarioides Steyaert) in Robusta coffee (Coffea canephora Pierre) and breeding perspectives. Tree
Genet. Genomes 2012, 9, 351–360. [CrossRef]
49.
Gichuru, E.; Alwora, G.; Gimase, J.; Kathurima, C. Coffee leaf rust (Hemileia vastatrix) in Kenya—A review. Agronomy 2021, 11, 2590.
[CrossRef]
50.
De Andrade, C.C.L.; Vicentin, R.P.; Costa, J.R.; Perina, F.J.; De Resende, M.L.V.; Alves, E. Alterations in antioxidant metabolism in
coffee leaves infected by Cercospora coffeicola. Ciênc. Rural 2016, 46, 1764–1770. [CrossRef]
51.
Otieno, W. Armillaria Root Rot of Tea in Kenya: Characterization of the Pathogen and Approaches to Disease Management; Wa-
geningen University and Research; Wageningen University:
Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2002.
Available online:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Armillaria-root-rot-of-tea-in-Kenya-%3A-of-the-and-to-Otieno/c0f9753b5d1
98b0a8eb412d40b560c58304eef02#citing-papers (accessed on 16 February 2022).
52.
Fang, Y.; Ramasamy, R.P. Current and prospective methods for plant disease detection. Biosensors 2015, 5, 537–561. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53.
López-Lima, D.; Carrión, G.; Sánchez-Nava, P.; Desgarennes, D.; Villain, L. Fungal diversity and Fusarium oxysporum pathogenicity
associated with coffee corky-root disease in Mexico. Rev. Fac. Cienc. Agrar. UNCuyo 2020, 52, 276–292.
54.
Hariharan, G.; Prasannath, K. Recent advances in molecular diagnostics of fungal plant pathogens: A mini review. Front. Cell.
Infect. Microbiol. 2021, 10. [CrossRef]
55.
Senanayake, I.; Rathnayaka, A.; Marasinghe, D.; Calabon, M.; Gentekaki, E.; Lee, H.; Hurdeal, V.; Pem, D.; Dissanayake, L.;
Wijesinghe, S. Morphological approaches in studying fungi: Collection, examination, isolation, sporulation and preservation.
Mycosphere 2020, 11, 2678–2754. [CrossRef]
56.
Arneson, P. Coffee Rust; Plant Health Instructor; The American Phytopathological Society (APS): St. Paul, MN, USA, 2000.
57.
Abu Mettleq, A.S.; Abu-Naser, S.S. A rule based system for the diagnosis of coffee diseases. Int. J. Acad. Inf. Syst. Res. (IJAISR)
2019, 3, 1–8.
58.
Hailu, B.Z. Fungal Disease Dynamics, Genetic Variation and Biodiversity-Yield Relationships: A Study Along a Gradient of
Coffee Management in Southwestern Ethiopia. Ph.D. Thesis, Stockholm University, Faculty of Science, Department of Ecology,
Environment and Plant Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden, 2020.
59.
de Resende, M.L.V.; Pozza, E.A.; Reichel, T.; Botelho, D.M.S. Strategies for coffee leaf rust management in organic crop systems.
Agronomy 2021, 11, 1865. [CrossRef]
60.
Lemma, D.T.; Abewoy, D. Review on integrated pest management of coffee berry disease and coffee berry borer. Int. J. Plant Breed.
Crop Sci. 2021, 8, 1001–1008.
61.
Bailey, J.A. Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control; CAB International: Wallingford, UK, 1992.
62.
De Silva, D.D.; Crous, P.W.; Ades, P.K.; Hyde, K.D.; Taylor, P.W.J. Life styles of Colletotrichum species and implications for plant
biosecurity. Fungal Biol. Rev. 2017, 31, 155–168. [CrossRef]

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
15 of 17
63.
Wassie, A.K. Integrated diseased management on coffee wilt disease caused by Fusarium xylarioides and its distribution in
Ethiopian review. Agric. Res. Technol. Open Access J. 2019, 23, 302–308. [CrossRef]
64.
Wrigley, G. Coffee; Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical: Harlow, UK; Essex, UK, 1988.
65.
Alemu, T. A review of coffee wilt disease, Gibberella xylarioides (Fusarium xylarioides) in Africa with special reference to Ethiopia.
Ethiop. J. Biol. Sci. 2012, 11, 65–103.
66.
Nelson, S.C. Cercospora Leaf Spot and Berry Blight of Coffee; Plant Disease; University of Hawaii: Mänoa, Hawaii, 2008. Available
online: https://www.ctahr.hawaii.edu/oc/freepubs/pdf/PD-41.pdf (accessed on 16 February 2022).
67.
Vale, P.A.S.; De Resende, M.L.V.; Botelho, D.M.D.S.; De Andrade, C.C.L.; Alves, E.; Ogoshi, C.; Guimarães, S.D.S.C.; Pfenning,
L.H. Epitypiﬁcation of Cercospora coffeicola and its involvement with two different symptoms on coffee leaves in Brazil. Eur. J.
Plant Pathol. 2020, 159, 399–408. [CrossRef]
68.
Schwartz, H.F.; Gent, D.H. Cercospora leaf spot (Cucumber, Melon, Pumpkin, Squash, and Zucchini). In High Plains IPM
Guide; University of Wyoming: Laramie, WY, USA; University of Nebraska: Lincoln, NE, USA; Colorado State University: Fort
Collins, CO, USA; Montana State University: Bozeman, MT, USA, 2007. Available online: http://wiki.bugwood.org/uploads/
CercosporaLeafSpot-Cucurbits.pdf (accessed on 16 February 2022).
69.
Souza, A.G.C.; Rodrigues, F.; Mafﬁa, L.A.; Mizubuti, E.S.G. Infection process of Cercospora coffeicola on coffee leaf. J. Phytopathol.
2010, 159, 6–11. [CrossRef]
70.
Gezahgne, A.; Coetzee, M.P.A.; Wingﬁeld, B.D.; Wingﬁeld, M.J.; Roux, J. Identiﬁcation of the Armillaria root rot pathogen in
Ethiopian plantations. For. Pathol. 2004, 34, 133–145. [CrossRef]
71.
Jayawardena, R.S.; Hyde, K.D.; Chen, Y.J.; Papp, V.; Palla, B.; Papp, D.; Bhunjun, C.S.; Hurdeal, V.G.; Senwanna, C.; Manawasinghe,
I.S.; et al. One stop shop IV: Taxonomic update with molecular phylogeny for important phytopathogenic genera: 76–100 (2020).
Fungal Divers. 2020, 103, 87–218. [CrossRef]
72.
Culliao, A.G.L.; Barcelo, J.M. Fungal and mycotoxin contamination of coffee beans in Benguet province, Philippines. Food Addit.
Contam. Part A 2015, 32, 250–260. [CrossRef]
73.
Dos Santos, D.G.; Coelho, C.C.d.S.; Ferreira, A.B.R.; Freitas-Silva, O. Brazilian coffee production and the future microbiome and
mycotoxin proﬁle considering the climate change Scenario. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 858. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Jard, G.; Liboz, T.; Mathieu, F.; Guyonvarch, A.; Lebrihi, A. Review of mycotoxin reduction in food and feed: From prevention in
the ﬁeld to detoxiﬁcation by adsorption or transformation. Food Addit. Contam. Part A 2011, 28, 1590–1609. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Shuping, D.; Eloff, J. The use of plants to protect plants and food against fungal pathogens: A review. Afr. J. Tradit. Complement.
Altern. Med. 2017, 14, 120–127. [CrossRef]
76.
Takundwa, M.; Ruzvidzo, O.; Uzabakiriho, J.; Titus, P.; Chimwamurombe, P. Molecular identiﬁcation of fungal species associated
with leaf lesions of Marama bean seedlings in Namibia. Afr. J. Microbiol. Res. 2015, 9, 194–200. [CrossRef]
77.
Cerda, R.; Avelino, J.; Gary, C.; Tixier, P.; Lechevallier, E.; Allinne, C. Primary and secondary yield losses caused by pests and
diseases: Assessment and modeling in coffee. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0169133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Lemessa, F.; Abera, A.; Adunga, G.; Garedew, W. Association of mycoﬂora with coffee (Coffea arabica L.) beans at limmu coffee
plantation, Southwestern Ethiopia. Plant Pathol. J. 2015, 14, 136–141. [CrossRef]
79.
Hindorf, H.; Omondi, C.O. A review of three major fungal diseases of Coffea arabica L. in the rainforests of Ethiopia and progress
in breeding for resistance in Kenya. J. Adv. Res. 2011, 2, 109–120. [CrossRef]
80.
De Paula, P.V.A.A.; Pozza, E.A.; Santos, L.A.; Chaves, E.; Maciel, M.P.; Paula, J.C.A. Diagrammatic scales for assessing brown eye
spot (Cercospora coffeicola) in red and yellow coffee cherries. J. Phytopathol. 2016, 164, 791–800. [CrossRef]
81.
Djuikem, C.; Grognard, F.; Touzeau, S.; Bowong, S. Modelling and controlling fungus Hemileia vastatrix, a coffee pest. In
Proceedings of the BIOMATH 2019-International Conference on Mathematical Methods and Models in Biosciences, Bedlevo,
Poland, 16–22 June 2019; pp. 16–24.
82.
Douglas, S.M. Leaf spot diseases of ornamental trees and shrubs. In The Connecticut Experiment Station Report; University of
Minnesota Extension: Falcon Heights, MN, USA, 2012.
83.
Ghosh, S.K.; Chaudhary, M.; Manjunatha, N. 14 Endophytes: A potential bio-agent for the plant protection. In Innovative Pest
Management Approaches for the 21st Century: Harnessing Automated Unmanned Technologies; Springer: Singapore, 2020; p. 273.
84.
Morelli, M.; Bahar, O.; Papadopoulou, K.K.; Hopkins, D.L.; Obradovic, A. Editorial: Role of endophytes in plant health and
defense against pathogens. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Salcedo-Sarmiento, S.; Aucique-Pérez, C.E.; Silveira, P.R.; Colmán, A.A.; Silva, A.L.; Mansur, P.S.C.; Rodrigues, F.; Evans, H.C.;
Barreto, R.W. Elucidating the interactions between the rust Hemileia vastatrix and a Calonectria mycoparasite and the coffee plant.
iScience 2021, 24, 102352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Mahmood, I.; Imadi, S.R.; Shazadi, K.; Gul, A.; Hakeem, K.R. Effects of Pesticides on Environment; Plant, Soil and Microbes; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 253–269.
87.
Petit, A.-N.; Fontaine, F.; Vatsa, P.; Clément, C.; Vaillant-Gaveau, N. Fungicide impacts on photosynthesis in crop plants.
Photosynth. Res. 2012, 111, 315–326. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Patil, S.; Sriram, S. Biological control of Fusarium wilt in crop plants using non-pathogenic isolates of Fusarium species. Indian
Phytopathol. 2020, 73, 11–19. [CrossRef]
89.
Naik, B.S. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles from endophytic fungi and their role in plant disease management. Microb.
Endophytes. 2020, 16, 307–321. [CrossRef]

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
16 of 17
90.
Khan, M.R.; Ahamad, F.; Rizvi, T.F. Chapter 8—Effect of nanoparticles on plant pathogens. In Advances in Phytonanotechnology;
Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2019; pp. 215–240.
91.
Ferreira, F.V.; Herrmann-Andrade, A.M.; Calabrese, C.D.; Bello, F.; Vázquez, D.; Musumeci, M.A. Effectiveness of Trichoderma
strains isolated from the rhizosphere of citrus tree to control Alternaria alternata, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Penicillium
digitatum A21 resistant to pyrimethanil in post-harvest oranges (Citrus sinensis L.(Osbeck)). J. Appl. Microbiol. 2020, 129, 712–727.
[CrossRef]
92.
Dowling, M.; Peres, N.; Villani, S.; Schnabel, G. Managing Colletotrichum on fruit crops: A “complex” challenge. Plant Dis. 2020,
104, 2301–2316. [CrossRef]
93.
Gimase, J.M.; Thagana, W.M.; Omondi, C.O.; Cheserek, J.J.; Gichimu, B.M.; Gichuru, E.K. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping
of resistance to coffee berry disease (Colletotrichum kahawae Waller Bridge) in Coffea arabica L. variety Rume Sudan. Afr. J. Agric.
Res. 2020, 16, 1184–1194. [CrossRef]
94.
Silva, M.D.C.; Várzea, V.; Guerra-Guimarães, L.; Gil Azinheira, H.; Fernandez, D.; Petitot, A.-S.; Bertrand, B.; Lashermes, P.;
Nicole, M. Coffee resistance to the main diseases: Leaf rust and coffee berry disease. Braz. J. Plant Physiol. 2006, 18, 119–147.
[CrossRef]
95.
Davis, A.P.; Gole, T.W.; Baena, S.; Moat, J. The impact of climate change on indigenous Arabica coffee (Coffea arabica): Predicting
future trends and identifying priorities. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e47981. [CrossRef]
96.
Jackson, D.; Skillman, J.; Vandermeer, J. Indirect biological control of the coffee leaf rust, Hemileia vastatrix, by the entomogenous
fungus Lecanicillium lecanii in a complex coffee agroecosystem. Biol. Control 2012, 61, 89–97. [CrossRef]
97.
Joshi, V.; Pandit, A.; Vaidya, D. Ochratoxin-A in food: An overview. Int. J. Food Ferment. Technol. 2017, 7, 13–24. [CrossRef]
98.
McQueen, C. Comprehensive Toxicology; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017.
99.
Santiago, W.D.; Teixeira, A.R.; de Andrade Santiago, J.; Lopes, A.C.A.; Brandão, R.M.; Barbosa, R.B.; Caetano, A.R.S.; das Graças
Cardoso, M.; Resende, M.L.V. Standardization of an analytical method to quantify ochratoxin-A in green coffee beans by high
performance liquid chromatography. Res. Soc. Dev. 2020, 9, e39985070. [CrossRef]
100. Viegas, C.; Pacíﬁco, C.; Faria, T.; De Oliveira, A.C.; Caetano, L.A.; Carolino, E.; Gomes, A.; Viegas, S. Fungal contamination in
green coffee beans samples: A public health concern. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A 2017, 80, 719–728. [CrossRef]
101. Suárez-Quiroz, M.; González-Rios, O.; Barel, M.; Guyot, B.; Schorr-Galindo, S.; Guiraud, J.P. Study of ochratoxin-A producing
strains in coffee processing. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2004, 39, 501–507. [CrossRef]
102. Varga, J.; Kocsubé, S.; Péteri, Z.; Samson, R. An Overview of Ochratoxin Research; CABI Publishers: London, UK, 2009.
103. Cinar, A.; Onba¸sı, E. Mycotoxins: The hidden danger in foods. Mycotoxins Food Saf. 2020, 1–21. [CrossRef]
104. Shanakhat, H.; Sorrentino, A.; Raiola, A.; Romano, A.; Masi, P.; Cavella, S. Current methods for mycotoxins analysis and
innovative strategies for their reduction in cereals: An overview. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2018, 98, 4003–4013. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Sun, J.; Li, W.; Liu, Y.; Lin, F.; Huang, Z.; Lu, F.; Bie, X.; Lu, Z. Growth inhibition of Fusarium graminearum and reduction of
deoxynivalenol production in wheat grain by bacillomycin D. J. Stored Prod. Res. 2018, 75, 21–28. [CrossRef]
106. Vieira, T.; Cunha, S.; Casal, S. Mycotoxins in coffee. In Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2015; pp. 225–233.
107. Gil-Serna, J.; Vázquez, C.; Sandino, F.G.; Valle, A.M.; González-Jaén, M.T.; Patiño, B. Evaluation of growth and ochratoxin
A production by Aspergillus steynii and Aspergillus westerdijkiae in green-coffee based medium under different environmental
conditions. Food Res. Int. 2014, 61, 127–131. [CrossRef]
108. Palumbo, J.D.; O’Keeffe, T.L.; Mahoney, N.E. Inhibition of ochratoxin A production and growth of Aspergillus species by phenolic
antioxidant compounds. Mycopathologia 2007, 164, 241–248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Aroyeun, S.; Adegoke, G. Reduction of ochratoxin-A (OTA) in spiked cocoa powder and beverage using aqueous extracts and
essential oils of Aframomum danielli. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2007, 6, 612–616.
110. Nguefack, J.; Nguikwie, S.; Fotio, D.; Dongmo, B.; Zollo, P.A.; Leth, V.; Nkengfack, A.; Poll, L. Fungicidal potential of essential
oils and fractions from Cymbopogon citratus, Ocimum gratissimum and Thymus vulgaris to control Alternaria padwickii and Bipolaris
oryzae, two seed borne fungi of rice (Oryza sativa L.). J. Essent. Oil Res. 2007, 19, 581–587. [CrossRef]
111. Magan, N.; Aldred, D. Post-harvest control strategies: Minimizing mycotoxins in the food chain. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2007, 119,
131–139. [CrossRef]
112. Basílico, M.Z.; Basilico, J.C. Inhibitory effects of some spice essential oils on Aspergillus ochraceus NRRL 3174 growth and
ochratoxin-A production. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 1999, 29, 238–241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Lee, S.-E.; Park, B.S.; Bayman, P.; Baker, J.L.; Choi, W.S.; Campbell, B.C. Suppression of ochratoxin biosynthesis by naturally
occurring alkaloids. Food Addit. Contam. 2007, 24, 391–397. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Kouadio, I.A.; Ban, L.K.; Dosso, M.B. Prevention of ochratoxin A (OTA) production in coffee beans using natural antifungal
derived from Solanum indicum L. green berries. J. Food Secur. 2019, 7, 63–71. [CrossRef]
115. Gómez, J.V.; Tarazona, A.; Mateo, F.; Jiménez, M.; Mateo, E.M. Potential impact of engineered silver nanoparticles in the control
of aﬂatoxins, ochratoxin A and the main aﬂatoxigenic and ochratoxigenic species affecting foods. Food Control 2019, 101, 58–68.
[CrossRef]
116. Bemvenuti, R.; Rodrigues, M.H.; Furlong, E. Efﬁciency of γ-oryzanol against the complex Fusarium graminearum growth and
mycotoxins production. Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 39, 240–246. [CrossRef]

Pathogens 2022, 11, 411
17 of 17
117. Misra, N.N.; Yadav, B.; Roopesh, M.S.; Jo, C. Cold plasma for effective fungal and mycotoxin control in foods: Mechanisms,
inactivation effects, and applications. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2019, 18, 106–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. De Silva, N.I.; Brooks, S.; Lumyong, S.; Hyde, K.D. Use of endophytes as biocontrol agents. Fungal Biol. Rev. 2019, 33, 133–148.
[CrossRef]
119. Duong, B.; Marraccini, P.; Maeght, J.-L.; Vaast, P.; Lebrun, M.; Duponnois, R. Coffee microbiota and its potential use in sustainable
crop management. A review. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2020, 4, 237. [CrossRef]
120. United States Department of Agriculture. Available online: https://nt.ars-grin.gov/fungaldatabases/fungushost/fungushost.cfm
(accessed on 16 February 2022).
121. Index Fungorum. 2022. Available online: http://www.indexfungorum.org/Names/IndexFungorumPartnership.htm (accessed
on 16 February 2022).
122. Mycobank. 2022. Available online: https://www.mycobank.org/ (accessed on 16 February 2022).
123. Noonim, P.; Mahakarnchanakul, W.; Nielsen, K.F.; Frisvad, J.C.; Samson, R.A. Isolation, identification and toxigenic potential of
ochratoxin A-producing Aspergillus species from coffee beans grown in two regions of Thailand. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2008, 128, 197–202.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Estupiñan-López, L.; Campos, V.P.; da Silva Júnior, J.C.; Pedroso, M.P.; Terra, W.C.; da Silva, J.C.P.; de Paula, L.L. Volatile
compounds produced by Fusarium spp. isolated from Meloidogyne paranaensis egg masses and corticous root tissues from coffee
crops are toxic to Meloidogyne incognita. Trop. Plant Pathol. 2018, 43, 183–193. [CrossRef]
125. Sousa, T.; Batista, L.; Passamani, F.; Lira, N.; Cardoso, M.; Santiago, W.; Chalfoun, S. Evaluation of the effects of temperature on
processed coffee beans in the presence of fungi and ochratoxin A. J. Food Saf. 2019, 39, e12584. [CrossRef]
126. Kuntawee, S.; Akarapisan, A. Isolation and identiﬁcation of Aspergillus species producing Ochratoxin a in Arabica coffee beans. J.
Agric. Technol. 2015, 11, 1235–1242.
127. Batista, L.R.; Chalfoun, S.M.; Prado, G.; Schwan, R.F.; Wheals, A.E. Toxigenic fungi associated with processed (green) coffee beans
(Coffea arabica L.). Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2003, 85, 293–300. [CrossRef]
128. Djadjiti, N.; Aziz, M.A.; Esther, O.K.; Dane, S. Isolation and Identiﬁcation of Fungal Pathogens Contaminating Some Coffee
Powder Marketed in the City of Abuja. J. Res. Med. Dent. Sci. 2020, 8, 172–175.
129. Pasin, L.A.A.P.; Almeida, J.R.d.; Abreu, M.S.d. Fungos associados a grãos de cinco cultivares de café (Coffea arabica L.). Acta. Bot.
Bras. 2009, 23, 1129–1132. [CrossRef]
130. Casas-Junco, P.P.; Ragazzo-Sánchez, J.A.; de Jesus Ascencio-Valle, F.; Calderón-Santoyo, M. Determination of potentially mycotox-
igenic fungi in coffee (Coffea arabica L.) from Nayarit. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 2018, 27, 891–898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Chaves, F.C.; Gianfagna, T.J.; Aneja, M.; Posada, F.; Peterson, S.W.; Vega, F.E. Aspergillus oryzae NRRL 35191 from coffee, a
non-toxigenic endophyte with the ability to synthesize kojic acid. Mycol. Prog. 2012, 11, 263–267. [CrossRef]
132. González-Osorio, H.; Botero, C.E.G.; Rivera, R.D.M.; Vega, N.W.O. Screening for phosphate-solubilizing fungi from colombian
andisols cultivated with coffee (Coffea arabica L.). Coffee Sci. 2020, e151666. [CrossRef]
133. Hongsanan, S.; Tian, Q.; Hyde, K.; Chomnunti, P. Two new species of sooty moulds, Capnodium coffeicola and Conidiocarpus
plumeriae in Capnodiaceae. Mycosp 2015, 6, 814–824. [CrossRef]
134. Maharachchikumbura, S.; Haituk, S.; Pakdeeniti, P.; Al-Sadi, A.; Hongsanan, S.; Chomnunti, P.; Cheewangkoon, R. Phaeosac-
cardinula coffeicola and Trichomerium chiangmaiensis, two new species of Chaetothyriales (Eurotiomycetes) from Thailand. Myco-
sphere 2018, 9, 769–778. [CrossRef]
135. Bongiorno, V.A.; Rhoden, S.A.; Garcia, A.; Polonio, J.C.; Azevedo, J.L.; Pereira, J.O.; Pamphile, J.A. Genetic diversity of endophytic
fungi from Coffea arabica cv. IAPAR-59 in organic crops. Ann. Microbiol. 2016, 66, 855–865. [CrossRef]
136. Oliveira, R.; Souza, R.; Lima, T.; Cavalcanti, M. Endophytic fungal diversity in coffee leaves (Coffea arabica) cultivated using
organic and conventional crop management systems. Mycosphere 2014, 5, 523–530. [CrossRef]
137. Saucedo-García, A.; Anaya, A.L.; Espinosa-García, F.J.; González, M.C. Diversity and communities of foliar endophytic fungi
from different agroecosystems of Coffea arabica L. in two regions of Veracruz, Mexico. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e98454. [CrossRef]
138. Fernandes, M.d.R.V.; Silva, T.A.C.; Pfenning, L.H.; Costa-Neto, C.M.d.; Heinrich, T.A.; Alencar, S.M.d.; Lima, M.A.d.; Ikegaki, M.
Biological activities of the fermentation extract of the endophytic fungus Alternaria alternata isolated from Coffea arabica L. Braz. J.
Pharm. Sci. 2009, 45, 677–685. [CrossRef]
139. Serrato-Diaz, L.M.; Mariño, Y.A.; Bayman, P. Pathogens causing Anthracnose and fruit rots of coffee associated with the coffee
berry borer and the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana in Puerto Rico. Phytopathology 2020, 110, 1541–1552. [CrossRef]
140. Kenny, M.; Galea, V.; Price, T. Germination and growth of Colletotrichum acutatum and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides isolates from
coffee in Papua New Guinea and their pathogenicity to coffee berries. Australas. Plant Path. 2012, 41, 519–528. [CrossRef]
141. María del Carmen, H.R.; Evans, H.C.; de Abreu, L.M.; de Macedo, D.M.; Ndacnou, M.K.; Bekele, K.B.; Barreto, R.W. New species and
records of Trichoderma isolated as mycoparasites and endophytes from cultivated and wild coffee in Africa. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 1–30.
142. Gizaw, B.; Tsegaye, Z.; Tefera, G. Isolation, identiﬁcation and characterization of yeast species from coffee waste collected from
Sidama and Gedio zone. J. Yeast Fungal Res. 2016, 7, 47–53.
143. Lu, L.; Tibpromma, S.; Karunarathna, S.; Thiyagaraja, V.; XU, J.C.; Jayawardena, R.S.; Lumyong, S.; Hyde, K.D. Taxonomic and
phylogenic appraisal of a novel species and a new record of Stictidaceae from coffee in Yunnan Province, China. Phytotaxa 2021,
528, 111–124. [CrossRef]
