1
Microbial nutrition and basic
metabolism
E.C.S. Chan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
1 INTRODUCTION
In nature, of all living organisms, microorgan-
isms are the most versatile and diversiﬁed with
regard to their nutritional requirements. For
example, microorganisms, such as bacteria, can
be found that represent the entire spectrum of
nutritional types. Some microbes have an
unconditional need for preformed complex
organic compounds while others can thrive
with just a few inorganic substances as their
sole nutritional requirements. Most microor-
ganisms fall between these two extremes.
Although great variation is found in the
speciﬁc requirements for growth of the diverse
species of microorganisms, in general, the
nature and functions of growth substances
are common for all cells. In part, this is because
the chemical composition of microbial cells is
more or less similar. For instance, all microbes
require a carbon source because carbon is a
component of protoplasm; nitrogen is a com-
ponent of many major macromolecules, such
as protein and nucleic acids. Over 95% of a
cell’s dry weight is made up of a few major
elements, such as C, O, H, S, P, K, Ca, Mg,
and Fe. All these substances must be put
together by biosynthesis to form cellular
material. However, not all growth substances
are incorporated into cell material. Some are
used instead as energy sources. For example,
carbon compounds are frequently used as
energy sources by many microorganisms; in-
organic sulphur compounds are used in energy
metabolism by some microbes.
Assimilated nutrient substances need to be
metabolized. Metabolism refers to the totality of
organized biochemical activities carried out by
an organism. Such activities, usually catalysed
by enzymes, are of two kinds: those involved in
generating energy; and those involved in using
energy. Some microorganisms use nutrients
absorbed by the cell as the source of energy in a
process called catabolism, which is the reverse
of biosynthesis (anabolism). In catabolism, large
molecules are degraded in sequential stepwise
reactions by enzymes and a portion of the
energy released is trapped in the form of
chemical energy. Other microorganisms derive
their energy from the trapping of light and also
convert it into chemical energy. This chemical
energy is then harnessed to do work for the
cell. A microorganism must perform many
different types of work, such as synthesis of
physical parts of the cell, repair or maintenance
of cell components, and growth. Thus metab-
olism may be viewed as the coupling of energy
generation and energy utilization. The kinds of
nutrients and how they are assimilated and fed
into the various metabolic pathways for energy
production and utilization in microorganisms
form the subject matter of this chapter.
2 CHEMICAL ELEMENTS
AS NUTRIENTS
It may be generalized that there are three
essential nutritional needs of a cell: water,
The Handbook of Water and Wastewater Microbiology
ISBN 0-12-470100-0
Copyright q 2003 Elsevier
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
