International Journal of Vaccines and Vaccination
Antioxidants and Vaccines
Submit Manuscript | http://medcraveonline.com
for people in all communities throughout the world. GVAP aims 
to strengthen routine immunization plans and introduce and 
develop new high-quality vaccines [1].
Though there are some adverse effects of vaccines, they are 
uncommon or less effective. While looking at the negative impact, 
one should not ignore vaccines; otherwise, it leads to severe 
problems due to lack of immunization. Some diseases (influenza, 
etc.) may spread to adults from children. Some vaccine-preventable 
diseases leave a person disfigured or disabled for life, and hence, 
they are a severe threat to this society. Usually, allergy from 
vaccines is a common problem for some children, and when it is, 
we should avoid giving that particular vaccine. Allergic reactions 
are due to certain ingredients that are present in the vaccines or 
due to other unknown reasons. In the meantime, adverse effects or 
toxicity of vaccines should be monitored thoroughly, or otherwise, 
certain compounds may alter immunity or even brain function 
during the developmental period of the pediatric population. One 
report reveals that children in developed countries receive high 
amounts of aluminum adjuvants through routine vaccinations. 
There are unbiased opinions on mercury, which is present in 
some vaccines [2,3].
Antioxidants (vitamins) play a significant role in disease 
management. Usually, diseases are mediated by reactive oxygen 
species [ROS]. Foods that are rich in antioxidants have a potential 
protective effect against disorders caused by ROS. Chronic 
diseases can be eliminated, and disease progression can be slowed 
by implementing the natural antioxidant defenses of the body 
or by supplementing them with dietary antioxidants. Natural 
antioxidants such as flavonoids, tannins, and polyphenols act by 
donating electrons to intermediate radicals and help the inhibition 
of lipid peroxidation. Antioxidants therapies have been in progress 
these days. N-acetylcysteine (for acetaminophen toxicity), alfa-
lipoic acid (for diabetic neuropathy), Edaravone (for ischemic 
stroke), and some flavonoids (for chronic venous insufficiency) as 
well as baicalein and catechins (for osteoarthritis) have clinical 
importance. Many reports reveal the role of antioxidants as 
vaccines or ameliorating vaccine-induced adverse effects. Fruits 
and vegetable are rich in vitamins, and hence intake of adequate 
amount of these food items by the pediatric population at the 
period of vaccination is advisable [4-9].
References
1.	 Global Vaccine Action Plan 2011-2020. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
2.	 Tomljenovic L, Shaw CA (2012) Mechanisms of aluminum adjuvant 
toxicity and autoimmunity in pediatric populations. Lupus 21(2): 
223-230.
3.	 Baker JP (2008) Mercury, Vaccines, and Autism: One Controversy, 
Three Histories. Am J Public Health 98(2): 244-253. 
4.	 Mehta SK and Gowder SGT (2015) Members of Antioxidant Machinery 
and Their Functions. In: Gowder SGT (Ed.), Basic Principles and 
Clinical Significance of Oxidative Stress. InTech, Croatia.
5.	 Gowder SJT (2013) An updated review of toxicity of bisphenol A 
(BPA) with special reference to the kidney. Current Mol Pharm 6(3): 
163-172. 
6.	 Carvalho-Queiroz C, Nyakundi R, Ogongo P, Rikoi H, Egilmez NK, et 
al. (2015) Protective Potential of Antioxidant Enzymes as Vaccines 
for Schistosomiasis in a Non-Human Primate Model. Front Immunol 
6: 273. 
7.	 LoVerde PT, Carvalho-Queiroz C, Cook R (2004) Vaccination with 
antioxidant enzymes confers protective immunity against challenge 
infection with Schistosoma mansoni. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 99(1).  
8.	 Hofve J (2010) Preventing Vaccine Adverse Effects. Health, Important 
Info. 
9.	 Gowder SJT, Devaraj H (2006) Effect of food flavour cinnamaldehyde 
on the antioxidant status of rat kidney. Basic & Clinical Pharmacol 
Toxicol 99(5): 379-382. 
 
Volume 2 Issue 1 - 2016
 
Qassim University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
*Corresponding author: Sivakumar Gowder, College of 
Applied Medical Sciences, Qassim University, Buraidah, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Tel: +966566873969; 
Fax:+96663802268; Email: 
Received: January 30, 2016 | Published: February 03, 2016
Editorial
Editorial
A vaccine is a biological preparation that improves immunity 
to a particular disease. The vaccines typically contain agents that 
resemble disease-causing microorganisms and are often made 
from weakened or inactive forms of the microbes, its toxins, or one 
of its surface proteins. The mechanism underlying this concept is 
that the agents stimulate the body’s immune system to recognize 
the agents as foreign, destroy them, and remember them so that 
the immune system can more easily recognize and destroy the 
microorganisms that it later encounters. People are suspicious 
in these days that these agents may have adverse effects. In this 
context, New York State Department of Health along with leading 
US organizations, UNICEF, and other prominent international 
organizations have finally concluded that vaccines are safe and 
save lives. The Global Vaccine Action Plan (GVAP) is a framework 
to prevent millions of deaths by 2020 through available vaccines 
Citation: Gowder S (2016) Antioxidants and Vaccines. Int J Vaccines Vaccin 2(1): 00020. DOI: 10.15406/
ijvv.2016.02.00020
