R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
JFS R: Concise Reviews/Hypothesis in Food Science
Yerba Mate Tea (Ilex paraguariensis):
A Comprehensive Review on Chemistry, Health
Implications, and Technological Considerations
C.I. HECK AND E.G. DE MEJIA
ABSTRACT: Yerba Mate tea, an infusion made from the leaves of the tree Ilex paraguariensis, is a widely consumed
nonalcoholic beverage in South America which is gaining rapid introduction into the world market, either as tea
itself or as ingredient in formulated foods or dietary supplements. The indigenous people have used it for centuries
as a social and medicinal beverage. Yerba Mate has been shown to be hypocholesterolemic, hepatoprotective, central
nervous system stimulant, diuretic, and to benefit the cardiovascular system. It has also been suggested for obesity
management. Yerba Mate protects DNA from oxidation and in vitro low-density lipoprotein lipoperoxidation and has
a high antioxidant capacity. It has also been reported that Yerba Mate tea is associated to both the prevention and the
cause of some types of cancers. Yerba Mate has gained public attention outside of South America, namely the United
States and Europe, and research on this tea has been expanding. This review presents the usage, chemistry, biological
activities, health effects, and some technological considerations for processing of Yerba Mate tea. Furthermore, it
assesses in a concise and comprehensive way the potential of Ilex paraguariensis as a source of biological compounds
for the nutraceutical industry.
Keywords: Ilex paraguariensis, Mate tea, nutraceutical industry, tea, Yerba Mate
Introduction
Y
erba Mate tea (Mate), an herbal tea beverage widely con-
sumed in southern Latin American countries (southern Brazil,
Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay) is gaining rapid penetration into
world markets, including the United States. It is made from an infu-
sion of the dried leaves of Ilex paraguariensis, a plant of the Aquifo-
liaceae family (Small and Catling 2001; Grigioni and others 2004).
In Latin America, Mate is often druank out of a dried gourd using a
metalstrawcalled“bombilla.”Thedryleaves(about50g)arepacked
into the gourd and hot water is poured over them; this is then re-
peated multiple times, with as much as half to 1 L of water. In the
United States, however, Mate is commercially packed in individual
tea bags (1 to 2 g) or as Mate tea concentrate for use as ingredi-
ent in the food or dietary supplement industries. Considering the
importance of the growing consumption of Mate tea and Mate tea
containing products, the objective of this review is to compile and
comprehensively analyze updated scientific information on Yerba
Mate, including its composition, physiological effects, and potential
health implications. In addition, this review hopes to further stim-
ulate uses of Yerba Mate as nutraceutical ingredient. This compiled
knowledge may provide a central resource for future research on
Yerba Mate.
Mateteahasrecentlybeenhighlypublicizedforitshealthbenefits
but there have been also concerns about its safety. The scientific lit-
erature, on one hand, reports that Mate tea is hypocholesterolemic,
hepatoprotective (Filip and Ferraro 2003), central nervous system
stimulant, diuretic (Gonzalez and others 1993), and antioxidant
(Filip and others 2000; VanderJagt and others 2002). It also has ben-
MS 20070427 Submitted 6/5/2007, Accepted 8/12/2007. Authors are with
Dept. of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Univ. of Illinois, Urbana,
Champaign, IL 61801, U.S.A. Direct inquiries to author de Mejia (E-mail:
edemejia@uiuc.edu).
efits to the cardiovascular system (Schinella and others 2005), and
is a protector of DNA oxidation and in vitro low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL) lipoperoxidation (Bracesco and others 2003). Some stud-
ies have also suggested its potential in the management of obe-
sity (Andersen and Fogh 2001; Pittler and Ernst 2004; Opala and
others 2006). Numerous active phytochemicals have been iden-
tified in Mate tea that may be responsible for its health bene-
fits. Among them, the 2 highest compounds are the polyphenols
(chlorogenic acid) and xanthines (caffeine and theobromine), fol-
lowed by purine alkaloids (caffeic acid, 3, 4-dicaffeoylquinic acid,
3, 5-dicaffeoylquinic acid), flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol, and
rutin), amino acids, minerals (P, Fe, and Ca), and vitamins (C, B1,
and B2) (Pomilio and others 2002; Zaporozhets and others 2004).
Not only has Mate tea been shown to contain high concentrations
of bioactive compounds, it has also been shown to be cytotoxic to
human cancer hepatoma cells (HepG2), and can act as a catalytic
inhibitor of topoisomerase II (Ramirez-Mares and others 2004).
On the other hand, some epidemiological studies have reported
an association between the consumption of Mate tea and an in-
creased risk of various types of cancer, including oral, oropharyn-
geal, esophageal, laryngeal, and bladder (Goldenberg and others
2003; Sewram and others 2003; Bates and others 2007).
Ethnobotany and Botanical Description
I
lex paraguariensis, from the family of holy plants, Aquifoliaceae,
is a native South American tree used for the production of
Yerba Mate tea. It is found primarily in the southern regions of
South America, namely, Brazil (Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais,
Parana, Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, Santa Catarina, Sao
Paulo), Argentina (Corrientes, Misiones), Paraguay (Alto Parana,
Amambay,Caaguazu,Canendiyu,Central,Guaira,Itapua,Misiones,
San Pedro), and Uruguay (USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources
Program 2007). Figure 1A shows the main regions where Mate is
R138
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007
C⃝2007 Institute of Food Technologists
doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.00535.x
Further reproduction without permission is prohibited

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
grown.Oftheseregions,Argentinaisthelargestproducer,cultivating
around 152000 hectares of Mate per year in the northeastern part
of the country (Misiones and Corrientes). This is equal to approx-
imately 280000 tons per year, representing a large portion of the
countries gross domestic product. Brazil and Paraguay are the 2nd
and 3rd largest producers, respectively. Worldwide, 290000 Ha of
area harvested with a production of 874678 tons of Mate were re-
portedin2002(FAOSTAT2007).TheoverallvalueofMateproduction
around the world is estimated in U.S. $1 billion in 2004.
Ilex paraguariensis is a subtropical dioecious evergreen tree that
can reach 18 m in height. Figure 1B shows a picture of the Mate
plant. The Mate tree is a flower and fruit producing plant, flowering
from October to November and producing fruit from March to June.
The Mate plant requires a strict regimen of annual rainfall both in
amount, no less than 1200 mm, and distribution throughout the
year. It is, however, much less susceptible to temperature, being
able to withstand temperatures of –6 ◦C, with an average annual
temperature of 21 to 22 ◦C. It is also able to withstand the frequent
snowfalls that are attributed to the mountainous region in which it
inhabits.
The cultivation and harvesting of Mate is not a uniform proce-
dure and is conducted by various methods depending on the re-
gion. The 3 primary ways for cultivation and harvest are extractive
exploitation of the natural forest, mixed system, and cultivated Mate
plantations. Extractive exploitation of the natural forest utilizes wild
harvestingofMatefromtheforestandisthemostinconsistentofthe
Figure 1 --- (A) Map of South America showing growing re-
gions for Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) 1 Argentina; 2
Brazil, 3 Paraguay, 4 Uruguay. (B) Yerba Mate plant.
3 methods based on quality and quantity. The 2nd method, mixed
system, combines forest growth with better cultivation practices,
including replanting of plants as they are lost and improved prun-
ing methods. This practice yields a better production rate for the
growing of natural forest products. Both natural forest harvest and
mixed system cultivation are primarily found in Brazil. Cultivated
Mate plantations, believed to be the most efficient method of pro-
duction, began in Argentina since 1915. This method increases both
yield and harvest efficiency by allowing for growth of more plants in
a given area and the use of mechanical harvesting, which offsets the
higher growing cost (Giberti 1994).
Mate Tea Processing
Yerba Mate is not consumed as a raw product but instead it is
processed before it reaches the consumer. Fresh Mate leaves un-
dergo several stages of processing before it is ready to be packaged.
This involves blanching, drying, and generally aging of the tea. The
conditions for processing are widely varied depending on the pro-
ducer and the final objective for the desired style and flavor of Mate
tea. Processors can vary the time and temperature of blanching and
drying. Not all producers will age the tea, while others will vary the
aging time (Bastos and others 2006a). However, the overall process
is generally the same. Figure 2A shows a typical process flow chart
for Mate tea.
Mate goes through very little fermentation and the blanching
process that deactivates enzymes, that is, polyphenol oxidase. The
difference in the blanching process, however, is that green tea leaves
are steamed or pan-fried and Mate tea leaves are flash heated over
open flame. This blanching process is in contrast to that for the
production of black tea; the leaves for black tea are allowed to wither
and ferment and are not blanched before drying. Figure 2B shows
the process for producing green and black teas. In black tea, the
enzyme polyphenol oxidase is allowed to oxidize polyphenols to
form dimerized compounds, that is, catechins to theaflavins (Hara
2001).
The major difference between green tea and Mate tea produc-
tion is the drying method. Green tea is dried primarily through a
fast, high temperature air drying, which retains more of the fresh
leave characteristics, as well as developing characteristic flavor and
aroma compounds. Mate tea is dried very slowly and often using
wood smoke. This imparts very different flavor characteristics and
contributes to changes in the chemical makeup and physical ap-
pearance. Another important difference between Mate and green
tea is the presence of stems in the final product. Green tea produc-
tion removes all large stems before grinding (Graham 1992); how-
ever, Mate will generally have a high content of stem pieces present,
depending on the producer.
Phytochemistry
Polyphenols
Polyphenols are a class of compounds containing a benzene ring
bound with one or more hydroxyl groups. These compounds have
been analyzed with a number of methods, including a tyrosinase
biosensor,FolinCiocalteuassay,andhigh-performanceliquidchro-
matography (HPLC) (Carini and others 1998; Chandra and De Mejia
Gonzalez 2004; Dall’Orto 2005). With these analyses it has been
shown that the variety of Mate, degree of milling, and blending with
other teas determine the concentration of polyphenols extracted
in an infusion. On average, the amount of polyphenols extracted
from Mate tea is 92 mg equivalents of chlorogenic acid per gram
of dry leaves, with blended teas having significantly less (Dall’Orto
2005). The polyphenol concentration of Mate has also shown a
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R139

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
strong correlation to its overall antioxidant capacity (Chandra and
De Mejia Gonzalez 2004). Mate showed a slightly higher polyphe-
nol concentration, 7.73 ± 0.15 mg chlorogenic acid/mL water ex-
tract, than green tea, 7.15 ± 0.14 mg chlorogenic acid/mL water
extract. This correlates to a higher antioxidant capacity for Mate,
90.45 ± 0.22% inhibition of free radical, than green tea, 88.36 ±
0.76% inhibition of free radical, when the 1,1-diphenyl-2-picryl-
hydrayl(DPPH)methodwasused(Bastosandothers2007).Further-
more, the amount of polyphenols extracted from Mate is affected by
the extraction method used, that is, water or organic solvent, with
50% acetone extraction yielding the highest amount of polyphenols
(Turkmen and others 2006).
Polyphenolic compounds found in Mate tea differ significantly
from green tea because Mate tea contains high concentration of
chlorogenic acid and no catechins (Chandra and De Mejia Gonzalez
2004). Table 1 shows the diversity of polyphenolic compounds in
green tea, black tea, and Mate tea.
Xanthines
Xanthines are a class of purine alkaloids found in many different
plants, including tea, coffee, and chocolate. The xanthines found
in Mate include theophylline (1,3-dimethylxanthine), theobromine
(3,7-dimethylxanthine),
and
caffeine
(1,3,7-trimethylxanthine)
(Athayde and others 2000). The structural formulas of these com-
pounds are presented in Figure 3. Of these three, caffeine is found
in the highest concentration, 1% to 2% of dry weight, followed by
theobromine,0.3%to0.9%ofdryweight(Itoandothers1997).These
2 compounds are found primarily in the leaves of the plant and in
smaller concentrations in the woody stems that are often present
in the product as well as in the epicuticular waxes of the leaves
(0.5% wax content of dry leaf weight), with 5.9 to 17.0 ng of caffeine
per milligram of wax and 0.9 to 3.5 ng theobromine per milligram
Mate tea
Harvest: 
Tender 
leaves and 
stems are 
harvested, 
bagged, 
weighed and 
transported 
to 
processing 
facility
Blanching
(Sapeco):  
Product is flash 
heated (500 ºC) 
over wood or 
propane fire 
between 10 sec 
to 3 min which 
breaks the 
epidermis and the 
estomas to halt 
oxidation and 
leaf enzymes
Drying 
(Barbaqua):  
Leaves are put 
into drying 
chambers where 
filtered or 
unfiltered smoke 
and heat (100 ºC) 
is used to dry the 
leaves from 10-
12% humidity to 
4.5%, this takes 
approximately 8-
24 h
Aging 
(Cancheada):  
Dry product is 
put into cement 
or cedar aging 
chambers for as 
long as 12 
months.  This 
helps to develop 
the flavor of 
Mate
Packaging 
Aged product is 
milled to 
desired size 
before 
packaging
Fresh leaves
Withering
Rolling
Fermenting
Drying
Blanching (100 ºC):  
steaming or pan 
frying
Rolling 
Drying
Fresh leaves
Black tea
Green tea
A
B
Figure 2 --- (A) Flow chart
for the processing of Ilex
paraguariensis leaves into
Yerba Mate tea (Adapted
from Schmalko and
Alzamora 2001). (B) Flow
chart for the processing of
Camellia sinensis leaves
into green and black teas
(Adapted from Hara 2001).
of wax (Athayde and others 2000), though the major quantities of
these methylxanthines exist inside the leaves.
The concentration of caffeine in relation to consumer consump-
tionhasbeenfoundtobeapproximately78mgofcaffeinein1cupof
Mate tea (approximately 150 mL). Compared to coffee, this is a very
similar amount of caffeine consumption, approximately 85 mg per
cup. However, the customary rate of Mate consumption prepared
in the traditional method can present intakes of around 500 mL,
resulting in 260 mg or more of total caffeine (Mazzafera 1997).
In contrast to theobromine and caffeine, theophylline has been
found in only small quantities in the leaves. This may be due
to the fact that theophylline appears to be an intermediate in
the catabolism of caffeine in the plant. It is believed that the
main route of theophylline metabolism involves conversion to
3-methylxanthine, which is further demethylated to xanthine prior
to entering the purine catabolism pathway and being degraded via a
xanthine →uric acid →allantoin →allantoic acid →→CO2 + NH3
route. It has been shown that when theophylline is radioactively la-
beled, the label will show up in caffeine and theobromine through
theresynthesisofcaffeineviaatheophylline→3-methylxanthine→
theobromine→caffeinepathway(Itoandothers1997).Thefactthat
theophylline has been difficult to find in varying tests on Mate may
be due to theophylline metabolism into caffeine and theobromine.
Yerba Mate is often sold as dried ground leaves; however, it has
been suggested that the drying process can significantly affect the
concentration of caffeine as well as color and chlorophyll content
of the leaves. Schmalko and others (2001) examined the caffeine,
color, and chlorophyll content of Mate leaves after 3 stages of dry-
ing. The 1st stage was blanching, sapeco, with a temperature of
500 to 550 ◦C for 2 to 4 min; the 2nd and 3rd stages were the dry-
ing stages, barbaqua, with a temperature of about 110 ◦C. These
drying stages showed a dramatic decrease in caffeine (30%) and
R140
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
chlorophyll (70% to 80%) concentrations, and a decrease of green
color. However, even though the caffeine concentration in the dried
productwaslowerthaninfreshleaves,evidencebyBastosandothers
(2006a showed that when the leaves were dried and used to prepare
Mate infusions, significantly more caffeine and caffeoylquinic acids
were extracted than when using fresh leaves. This increased extrac-
tion of compounds is likely from the disruption of the cells during
the drying process. It may also be explained by a decrease in mois-
ture concentration to leaves and an increase in soluble solids during
drying, thus leading to a greater amount of compounds dissolved
into the infusion. Evidence has also been presented that the time of
harvest plays a role in the concentration of methylxanthines found
in Mate, ranging between 1 and 10 mg total methylxanthines/g de-
pending on time of harvest (Schubert and others 2006).
Caffeoyl derivatives
The caffeoyl derivatives found in Mate include caffeic acid,
chlorogenic acid, 3, 4-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 3, 5-dicaffeoylquinic
acid, and 4, 5-dicaffeoylquinic acid (Filip and others 2000). These
caffeoyl derivatives are the primary constituents that account
for the antioxidant capacity of Mate tea. Figure 4 shows the
chemical structure for chlorogenic acid, 4,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid,
3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, and 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid. They have
been analyzed primarily by 2 different methods, spectrophometri-
cally (330 nm) and by HPLC, and are often correlated with chloro-
genic acid as a standard with a concentration of 6.90 ± 0.09 mg
chlorogenic acid/g dry leaves (Filip and others 2000). This is rep-
resentative of 0.48 mg chlorogenic acid/mL and roughly 72 mg in
1 cup (150 mL) of Mate brew, when prepared with 1.5 g per 50
mL water (Mazzafera 1997). These compounds can also be iden-
tified individually by HPLC and in combination with liquid chro-
matography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS), with absorptions at 242,
228, and 330 nm (Carini and others 1998; Chandra and De Mejia
Gonzalez 2004). Figure 5 shows a chromatographic profile gener-
ated by our group for the identification of caffeoyl derivatives in
Mate (I. paraguariensis) (Heck and Gonzalez de Mejia 2007). It is
apparent that the large constituents are chlorogenic acid and its
Table 1 --- Polyphenols in green tea, black tea, and Mate
tea.a
Green tea
Black tea
Mate tea
Caffeic acid
r
r
Caffeine
r
r
r
Caffeoyl derivatives
r
Caffeoylshikimic acid
r
Catechin
r
r
Catechin gallate
r
Chlorogenic acid
r
Coumaric acid
r
Epicatechin gallate
r
r
Epigallocatechin
r
Epigallocatechin gallate
r
Feruloylquinic acid
r
Gallic acid
r
r
Gallocatechin gallate
r
r
Kaempferol
r
r
r
Myricetin
r
r
Procyanidin
r
Quercetin
r
r
r
Quinic acid
r
r
Rutin
r
r
r
Theaﬂavin
r
Theobromine
r
r
aAdapted from Carini and others (1998); Chandra and de Mejia Gonzalez
(2004); Atoui and others (2005); Bastos and others (2007); Bravo and others
(2007).
derivativesandthedicaffeoylquinicacids:3,4-dicaffeoylquinicacid,
3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, and 4,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid; though the
specific identity of each dicaffeoylquinic acid peak has not been
described (Carini and others 1998). This profile agrees with the
compounds presented in Table 2 regarding the concentrations of
the caffeoyl derivatives found in Mate (I. paraguariensis) compared
with I. dumosa, I. brevicuspis, and I. argentina. This table shows
that I. paraguariensis contains the highest concentrations of the
caffeoyl derivatives while the other species have much lower con-
centrations and vary in their dicaffeoylquinic acid concentrations
(Filip and others 2001). It is because of the high concentrations of
these compounds that Mate possesses a very high overall antioxi-
dant capacity (Filip and others 2000).
Saponins
Saponins are bitter and highly water-soluble compounds found
in many types of plants and they are believed to be one of the fac-
tors for the distinct flavor of Mate tea. Not only do they play a role in
flavor but are also attributed to anti-inflammatory and hypocholes-
terolemic properties (Gnoatto and others 2005). Several of these
compounds,namely,triterpenoidsaponinswithursolicandoleano-
lic moieties, have been isolated from the leaves of Mate. The pri-
marysaponinsidentifiedcontainedtheursolicacidmoietyandwere
named: Matesaponins 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (Gosmann and others 1995;
Kraemerandothers1996).Table3showstheprimarysaponinsiden-
tified in Mate (I. paraguariensis) as well as those for other species of
Ilex; included are common R group substitutions. Figure 6 shows a
structure of a generic saponin aglycon onto which various R groups
areattached.Thehypocholesterolemicpropertiesmaybeattributed
to the Mate saponin inhibition of passive diffusion of colic acid and
formation of micelles that cannot be absorbed and are thus excreted
(Ferreira 1997).
CH3
N 
N 
CH3 
N 
N 
O 
O 
CH3 
Theobromine 
Caffeine 
N 
N
O 
O 
CH3
CH3 
N
N 
N 
N 
CH3 
N 
N 
O 
O 
CH3
Theophylline 
Figure 3 --- Structure of
xanthines: theophylline
(1,3-dimethylxanthine),
theobromine (3,7-
dimethylxanthine), and
caffeine (1,3,7-trimethyl-
xanthine).
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R141

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Table 2 --- Concentration of caffeoyl derivatives in various Ilex species (% of dried weight).a
Species
Chlorogenic Acid
Caffeic Acid
3,4-DCQ
3,5-DCQ
4,5-DCQ
I. paraguariensis
2.800 ± 0.300
0.023 ± 0.004
0.855 ± 0.064
3.040 ± 0.180
2.890 ± 0.060
I. brevicuspis
0.915 ± 0.064
0.005 ± 0.001
0.130 ± 0.010
0.360 ± 0.060
0.490 ± 0.040
I. argentina
0.090 ± 0.015
0.003 ± 0.001
0.047 ± 0.010
0.545 ± 0.049
0.043 ± 0.003
I. dumosa
0.042 ± 0.009
0.012 ± 0.008
0.017 ± 0.001
0.147 ± 0.060
0.070 ± 0.014
aAdapted from Filip and others (2001).
3,4-DCQ = 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid; 3,5-DCQ = 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid; 4,5-DCQ = 4, 5-dicaffeoylquinic acid.
OH 
    HO 
  
HO 
O 
C 
C 
O 
CH CH 
O 
OH
OH
OH
OH 
  OH 
Chlorogenic 
OH
C CH CH 
O 
OH 
OH 
O
O
4,5-Dicaffeoylquinic 
C
  
HO 
OH
C CH CH 
O 
OH
OH
O 
O 
3,5-Dicaffeoylquinic 
O 
C 
C 
   
HO 
  OH 
C
CH CH 
O
OH
OH 
O
   
HO 
O
C
O
3,4-Dicaffeoylquinic 
C 
CH 
CH 
OH 
OH
CH 
CH 
OH
OH
CH 
CH 
OH 
OH
O 
O 
C
O
  HO 
   HO 
Figure 4 --- Structure of caffeoyl
deriviatives: chlorogenic acid,
4,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid,
3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, and
3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid.
Figure 5 --- Chromatographic (HPLC) proﬁle of Mate tea identifying caffeoyl derivatives and other compounds (Heck
and de Mejia 2007). Analysis was conducted using a 1050 Hewlett Packard (Palo Alto, Calif., U.S.A) gradient liquid
chromatograph, equipped with a 1050 HP auto sampler, a 1050 HP gradient pump, a 1050 HP photodiode array
detector (PDA), and helium sparge. A C18 RP guard column and a C18 RP Phenomenex Prodigy ODS column (250 mm ×
4.6 mm × 5 μm) were used. Column temperature was kept at ambient temperature, elution time was 0.9 mL/min,
and was performed with a solvent gradient. Solvent gradient consisted of solvent A (water/methanol/formic acid,
79.7/20/0.3) and B (methanol/formic acid, 99.7/0.3) mixed, starting with 0% B, linearly increasing to 25% B in 50 min,
increase to 80% B in 5 min and held at 80% B for 3 min, then a linear decrease to 0% B in 5 min and held at 0% B for
5 min. Injection volume was 50 μL and output at 280 nm.
R142
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Gnoatto and others (2005) recently developed a method utiliz-
ing HPLC with ultraviolet (UV) detection for analysis of saponins in
Mate. Total recovery of Matesaponin 1 was 94.5% and total concen-
tration of saponins in the aqueous extract was 352 μg/mL from 15
g of dried leaves in 100 mL water. While the main saponins in Mate
are formed with ursolic acid aglycons, 2 minor saponins have also
been identified that contain an oleanolic acid instead of the ursolic
acid (Martinet and others 2001). Pavei and others (2007) have also
developed and validated an HPLC method to characterize saponins
from I. paraguariensis Mate fruits.
Many of the saponins found in Ilex species have been shown to
possess antiparasitic properties, including Matesaponins 1, 3, and
4. It has also been confirmed that triterpenoids found in Ilex species
areantitrypanosomal.Ursolicacidand4,3-O-[α-D-glucopyranosyl-
(1-2)- α-D-galactopyranosyl] oleanolic acid had an IC50 of 4 μM
against Trypanosoma brucei. These findings may lead to the exam-
ination of the use of these compounds for new antitrypanosomal
derivatives (Taketa and others 2004).
Minerals
Mate also contains high concentrations of inorganic compounds.
The minerals aluminum, chromium, copper, iron, manganese,
nickel, potassium, and zinc are of particular interest due to their
importance in human metabolism and development. Using capil-
lary ion electrophoresis with indirect UV detection (Carducci and
others 2000) and atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Tenorio
Sanz and Torija Isasa 1991; Vera Garcia and others 1997), these min-
erals have been identified in varying concentrations and can vary
based on soil and seasonal factors. Using particle-induced X-ray
emission (PIXE), Giulian and others (2007) assayed Mate tea brands
before and after infusion and found a wide range of minerals and
that some depend on temperature and volume used in the infu-
sion, namely, chlorine and potassium. Wrobel and others (2000)
found the aluminum concentration as 369 ± 22 μg/g and a man-
Table 3 --- Saponins of Ilex species and their structural differences including R group substitutions.
Ilex Species
Saponin
Moiety
R
R1
R2
R3
paraguariensisa
Matesaponin 1
Ursolic acid
glc(1→3)ara
H
glc
H
Matesaponin 2
Ursolic acid
glc(1→3)rha(1→2)ara
H
glc
H
Matesaponin 3
Ursolic acid
glc(1→3)ara
H
glc(1→6)glc
H
Matesaponin 4
Ursolic acid
glc(1→3)rha(1→2)ara
H
glc(1→6)glc
H
Matesaponin 5
Ursolic acid
glc(1→3)rha(1→2)ara
H
glc(1→4)glc(1→6)glc
H
afﬁnisb
Afﬁnoside I
Pomolic acid
glc(1→3)ara
H
glc
H
crenatac
Ilexoside II
Pomolic acid
glc(1→3)ara
H
glc
H
integrad
Ilexoside XXV
Hydroxyursolic acid
glc
H
glc
CH2OH
Ilexoside XXVI
Hydroxyursolic acid
glc(1→6)glc
H
glc
CH2OH
Ilexoside XXVII
Rotundic acid
ara
H
glc
CH2OH
buxifoliab
Buxifolioside I
Dihydroxyursendioic acid
H
H
glc
CH3
Buxifolioside II
Dihydroxyursendioic acid
OH
H
glc
COOH
dumosae
Chikusetsusaponin Iva
Oleanolic acid
gluA
H
glc
H
Dumosaponin 5
Oleanolic acid
glc(1→2)gal
OH
glc
H
Dumosaponin 6
Oleanolic acid
ara(1→2)ara
H
glc
H
Dumosaponin 7
Oleanolic acid
gal
H
glc
H
latifoliaf
Latifolioside F
Ilexgenin
rha(1→2)glc(1→3)ara
H
rha(1→2)glc
H
Latifolioside G
Polmolic acid
rha(1→2)glc(1→3)ara
H
rha(1→2)glc
H
Latifolioside H
Siaresinolic acid
rha(1→2)glc(1→3)ara
H
rha(1→2)glc
H
argentinag
N/A
Rotundioic acid
H
H
glc
COOH
rotundah
Ilexosides XXXIII
Oxosiaresinolic acid
GlcA
H
H
CHO
Ilexosides XXXIV
Pedunculoside
SO3Na
H
glc
H
Ilexosides XXXV
Rotungenic acid
SO3Na
H
glc
CH2OH
Ilexosides XXXVI
Rotungenic acid
glc
H
glc
CH2OH
Ilexosides XXXVII
Rotundic acid
glc
H
glc
H
brevicuspisi
Brevicuspisaponin I
Hydroxyursolic acid
ara
H
H
CH3
Brevicuspisaponin II
Hydroxyursolic acid
ara
H
H
CH2OH
gluA = glucuronic acid; glu = glucose; gal = galcatose; ara = arabinose; rha = rhamnose; SO3Na = sulfate.
Gnoatto and others 2005a; Taketa and others 2004b; Taketa 2004c; Yano and others 1993d; Pires and others 1997e; Ouyang and others 1998f; Pires and others
2002g; Amimoto and others 1993h; Taketa and others 2000i.
R-O 
R3
COOR2
R1
Figure 6 --- Generic saponin structure with locations of
common R group substitutions.
ganese concentration of 2223 ± 110 μg/g; Mate could prove to be
a good dietary source of manganese, depending on bioavailability.
It should also be noted that an inverse correlation (correlation co-
efficients >0.82) was found between the amount of these minerals
leached into a Mate infusion and the tannin concentration; in the
lower tannin concentrations the best leaching was observed, with
the exception of nickel.
In addition to beneficial elements, toxic contaminants could be
present in Mate as well. Marchisio and others (2005) developed a
lead analysis method using ultrasonic nebulization associated to
inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (USN-
ICP-OES) and polyurethane foam. Their method demonstrated a
process for the detection of lead that proved to be fast, accurate, and
reliable and can measure small concentrations of lead. The concen-
trations of lead in Mate infusions were in the range between 7.6 and
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R143

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
8.9 μg/L. The average concentration of lead in commercial Mate
tea samples analyzed was 8.1 μg/L. The allowable limit for lead in
drinking water by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
is 15 μg/L; therefore, the levels found in Mate are well below the level
for concern (EPA 2003).
Mate adulterants
Adulterants of other Ilex species may be incorporated into the
final product, either intentionally or unintentionally. Six common
Ilex species found as adulterants in Mate tea were tested for theo-
bromine, theophylline, and caffeine. The species analyzed were
I. dumosa, I. pseudobuxus, I. brevicuspis, I. theezans, I. microdonta,
and I. argentina; overall results showed that these other species con-
tained little to none of the aforementioned compounds. Only traces
of caffeine were detected in I. theezans, I. dumosa, I. microdonta,
and I. pseudobuxus. Furthermore, only traces of theobromine were
detected in I. argentina and I. microdonta. Theophylline was only
quantifiably detected in I. pseudobuxus at 6 ppm (Filip and others
1998). Utilizing HPLC and NMR to analyze Ilex varieties caffeine
and theobromine were only found in I. paraguariensis compared to
other Ilex adulterating species (Reginatto and others 1999; Choi and
others 2005).
These adulterants can be problematic for the quality of Mate teas
due to their differing concentration of saponins. Mate tea prepared
with I. paraguariensis, showed to be the least bitter of all extracts
prepared with adulterating species. Thus, it is possible that the ad-
dition of adulterating species can have a significant effect on the
bitterness of Mate beverages. Not only do the adulterating plants
contain greater concentrations of bitter compounds but the fruits of
the I. paraguariensis plant itself also contain highly bitter saponins.
If these fruits were incorporated into the Mate products it may lead
to an increase in bitterness and a decrease in overall quality (Taketa
2004).
A number of these species have also been analyzed for their
saponin concentration. Analysis showed that a majority of the
species including I. buxifolia, I. crenata, I. affinis, I. rotunda, I. bre-
vicuspis, I. argentina, and I. integra all have saponin aglycons not
found in I. paraguariensis and I. dumosa; instead of ursolic acid or
oleanolic acid aglycons, they possess hydroxyursolic acid or deriva-
tives. Of the various Ilex species, I. dumosa is the most prevalent
adulterant and the more similar to I. paraguariensis saponin struc-
ture. All adulterating species, including I. dumosa, contained a large
variation in saponins, none of which was found in I. paraguarien-
sis. Due to the specificity of saponins, it may be possible to identify
adulterants in Mate based on saponin concentration, and with new
methods for rapid and precise identification of adulterants this may
now be a plausible method for the quality control of Yerba Mate
products (Pires and others 1997).
Biological Activities and Health Effects
T
able 4 shows an incomplete list of compounds that have been
identified in Yerba Mate and some of the most important re-
ported biological activities follow.
Antioxidant capacity
It has been found that the consumption of Mate tea significantly
contributes to the overall antioxidant intake and provides high
amounts of caffeoylquinic acid derivatives, with biological effects
potentially beneficial for human health (Bravo and others 2007).
Of all the Ilex species, I. paraguariensis has been shown to contain
the highest antioxidant activity and has been positively correlated
with the concentration of caffeoyl derivatives (Filip and others 2000;
Schinella and others 2000; Bracesco and others 2003; Bixby and oth-
ers 2005). The study of Mate’s ability to quench reactive oxygen
species (ROS) has been correlated to peroxidase-like activity. This
peroxidase-like activity is strongly related to the polyphenol con-
centration of Mate; the higher the polyphenol concentration, the
greater the peroxidase-like activity. This means, from the biological
standpoint, that polyphenols act similarly as the bodies 293 natu-
ral antioxidant enzymes and may prove to be potent supporters of
these systems.
The compound that may be primarily responsible for this activity
is chlorogenic acid (Anesini and others 2006).
Mate extract has shown to be a very potent inhibitor of oxidative
stress caused by ROS, considerably so for the liver and heart. The
heart is susceptible to oxidative stress during postischemic reper-
fusion, return of blood flow to organ and tissue after heart attack,
caused by the generation of ROS. Administering Mate extract de-
creased the lipid oxidation in the heart by protecting myocardial
tissue (Schinella and others 2005).
Recentstudieshaveshownthatnitrosativestress,areactionofsu-
peroxides with nitrous oxide (NO) forming peroxynitrite (ONOO),
causes protein nitration or nitrosylation, lipid peroxidation, DNA
damage, and cell death. Mate tea was able to prevent 95% of pro-
tein nitration when tested on bovine serum albumin; in this respect,
Mate was higher than both green tea and red wine. Mate was also
tested against peroxynitrite-induced cytotoxicity, associated with
stroke and myocardial ischemia, restriction in blood supply, and
Mate tea showed the highest inhibition against cytotoxicity, com-
pared with green tea and red wine (Bixby and others 2005). Mate has
also been able to reduce ATP, ADP, and AMP (nucleotide) hydrolysis,
which can help balance the circulatory system (Gorgen and others
2005).
Table 4 --- Compounds identiﬁed in Yerba Mate leaves and
some of their biological activities.
Compound
Biological activities
Caffeine
Anticarcinogenic, antiobesity, antioxidant, antitu-
mor, diuretic, energizer 20 to 200 mg, stimulant,
topoisomerase-I-inhibitor 0.1 M, topoisomerase-
II-inhibitor 99 mM, vasodilator
Chlorogenic-acid
Antioxidant IC50 = 54.2 μM, analgesic,
antiatherosclerotic, antibacterial, antidiabetic,
antitumor, choleretic
Chlorophyll
Antibacterial, anticancer
Choline
Antidiabetic, cholinergic, lipotropic
Nicotinic acid
Choleretic, hypocholesterolemic 1 to 6 g/day
Pantothenic acid
Antiallergic 100 to 500 mg/day, antiarthritic 500
to 2000 mg/day, antifatigue
Rutin
Antioxidant IC28 = 30 ppm IC50 = 120 μM,
antitumor, antitumor-promoter, antiulcer,
cAMP-phosphodiesterase-inhibitor,
topoisomerase-II-inhibitor IC50 = 1 μg/mL,
vasodilator
Tannin
Antioxidant 1/3 quercetin IC50 = 1.44 μg/mL,
antitumor, antitumor-promoter,
lipoxygenase-inhibitor, MAO-inhibitore
Theobromine
cAMP-inhibitor IC50 = 0.06 mg/mL,
cAMP-phosphodiesterase-inhibitor, diuretic
300 to 600 mg/day, stimulant, myorelaxant
Theophylline
cAMP-inhibitor IC50 = 0.06 mg/mL,
cAMP-phosphodiesterase-inhibitor, diuretic,
choleretic, stimulant, vasodilator, myorelaxant
100 μM
Ursolic acid
Analgesic, antioxidant IC50 = 10 μM,
antiperoxidant IC35 = 200 μg/mL,
protease-inhibitor IC85 = 18 μg/mL,
topoisomerase-II-inhibitor, antiarrhythmic,
anticancer, antialzheimer
Adapted from Duke (1992).
R144
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Ithasalsobeenreportedthathyperglycemiaisacausefordiabetic
complications due to dicarbonyls involved in advanced glycation
endproduct(AGE)formation.Oxidationhasbeenlinkedtoglycation
and Mate extracts show a dose-dependent inhibition of dicarbonyl
action (Gugliucci and Menini 2002; Lunceford and Gugliucci 2005).
Mate extracts significantly inhibited enzymatic and nonenzy-
matic lipid peroxidation in rat liver microsomes as well as an ef-
fective scavenger of super oxides (Schinella and others 2000). It has
been suggested that free radical-induced oxidation of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) plays a role in atherosclerosis. Mate has been
showntoinhibitthepropagationofLDLoxidationbyinhibitinglipid
peroxidation as well as DNA oxidation (Gugliucci and Stahl 1995;
Gugliucci 1996; Bracesco and others 2003). It has been shown that
this mechanism is possible in vitro; however, it is still under specu-
lation as to whether it is possible in vivo. Evidence also shows that
Mate possesses a much higher antioxidant capacity than green tea
13.1 nmol Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC)/μg equiv-
alents gallic acid compared to 9.1 nmol TEAC/μg equivalents gallic
acid, respectively (Newell and others 2007).
Weight management and obesity
Obesity is a growing concern in many countries and current re-
search in many areas is directed at finding a way to curb the epi-
demic. Mate tea has been shown to have possible effects in the area
of weight loss and management and current research has provided
somesupportiveevidence.ObesemenandwomenconsumingMate
tea have shown a decrease in respiratory quotient (RQ), indicating
an increase in fat oxidation (Martinet and others 1999). A herbal
infusion made from Mate, guarana, and damiana showed drastic
slowing of gastric emptying as well as a decrease in the perceived
time for gastric fullness thus increasing satiety. This was also fol-
lowed by a dramatic decrease in weight, after 45 d, in overweight
patients (Andersen and Fogh 2001). Mate has shown to have po-
tential in weight loss and is now being considered as dietary sup-
plement. Adding ingredients such as Mate, guarana, and damiana
into supplements has shown to be effective in reducing body weight
(Pittler and Ernst 2004). In a randomized, double blind, placebo-
controlled clinical trial, Mate was given in a supplement form that
also contained green tea, asparagus, black tea, guarana, and kidney
bean extracts. The results of this study showed that those taking the
supplement had reduced body fat and change in their indexes of
body composition (Opala and others 2006). It has been cited that
the effect of Mate on weight loss, while not directly known, could be
due to its caffeine concentration, contributing to lipolytic activity,
or saponin concentration, interfering with cholesterol metabolism
and delaying intestinal absorption of dietary fat (Dickel and others
2007). Mate tea can also affect other aspects of lipid metabolism. It
has the ability to inhibit atherosclerosis in rabbits when fed with a
high cholesterol diet and an aqueous extract of Mate tea (Mosimann
andothers2006).GivingMateextractstohypercholesterolemic-diet
fed rats resulted in a reduction in serum concentrations of choles-
terol and triglycerides (Paganini Stein and others 2005). Mate has
also shown to have potential as a digestive aid due to a choleretic
effect, increasing the rate of bile flow (Gorzalczany and others 2001).
One study has also demonstrated that Mate is capable of vaso relax-
ation of arterial beds in rats. Thus, suggesting that the tea may be
able to lower the risk for heart disease, as red wine is believed to do
so (Muccillo Baisch and others 1998).
Genotoxic and mutagenic activities
Little data exist regarding the toxicity of Mate tea and standard
in vitro assays are controversial. In one study, Mate extracts showed
to be genotoxic in bacterial cells through induction of functions that
regulate responses to DNA damage and disruptions in DNA replica-
tion, and mutagenic in Salmonella typhimurium. Ames test results
showed mutagenic activity at concentrations of 20 to 50 mg aque-
ous extract/plate and genotoxic at concentrations of 10 to 20 mg
aqueousextract/plate.However,whenS9microsomalfraction,cata-
lase, thiourea, or dipyridyl were added to the assay the genotoxic
activity of Mate was counteracted, suggesting that oxygen reactive
species are the factors responsible for the genotoxicity (Leitao and
Braga 1994; Fonseca and others 2000). The results of these in vitro
tests have not been confirmed in experimental animals or human
studies.
Mate association with carcinogenesis
Cancerprevention. Invitroandanimalexperimentshaveshown
a protective effect of Mate against cancer. Several studies have been
conducted on the anticancer properties of Mate tea and compar-
isons have been made with other teas such as green tea, believed to
have high anticancer potential (Yamamoto and others 1997). Tests
conducted by Ramirez-Mares and others (2004) on in vitro chemo-
preventiveactivityincludedcytotoxicity,TPA-inducedornithinede-
carboxylase (ODC), quinone reductase (QR) activities using HepG2
cells, and topoisomerase inhibitory activity using Saccharomyces
cereviseae.Thesetestsareofparticularimportancebecausecytotox-
icity is highly associated with anticancer activity. ODC is a promoter
of tumor growth and tumor cells often contain high concentrations
of ODC. QR is another screening method for anticancer activity and
topoisomerase is required for mitosis; cancer cells show higher con-
centrations of topoisomerase II (Topo II) than normal cells due to
high rates of cell division. Mate was shown to possess the highest
cytotoxicity against human liver cancer cells compared to green tea,
IC50 value of 12.01 g eq. (+) catechin/mL for Mate compared with
72 g eq. (+) catechin/mL for green tea. Table 5 shows the concentra-
tions of tea needed for various inhibitory activities on HepG2 cells.
Human antitopoisomerase II activity was significant and showed
a 65% inhibition compared with 15% for green tea (Ramirez-Mares
and others 2004). The catalytic topoisomerase inhibition, however,
was only on TopoII and not topoisomerase I (Topo I). An in vitro
study on oral cell carcinoma showed that concentrations greater
than 375 μg of solid extract/mL had complete inhibition of cancer
cell growth (Gonzalez de Mejia and others 2005). Mate has shown
to be a potent TopoII inhibitor and thus showing significant cancer
cell growth inhibition, even at low concentrations.
Proteasomeinhibitorsareanimportantaspectofcancerresearch
(Osanai and others 2007). The compound epigallocatechin gallate
(EGCG), found in green tea, has already been shown to inhibit pro-
teasomes(Osanaiandothers2007).Similarly,compoundshavebeen
identifiedinMatethatshowproteasomeinhibition(Arbiserandoth-
ers 2005). The compounds identified were 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid
(3,5-DCQ), 5-caffeoylquinic acid (5-CQ), and 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic
acid (3,4-DCQ), which act by inhibiting the chymotrypsin-like ac-
tivity of a purified 20S proteasome and 26S proteasome in Jurkat
Table 5 --- Inhibitory effect of Mate tea, green tea, and Ar-
disia tea against growth of HepG2 cancer cells.a
μg eq. (+) catechin/mL ± SD
Mate
Green tea
Ardisia
IC10
9.3 ± 0.6
50.7 ± 2.5
4.9 ± 1.4
IC50
12.0 ± 0.2
72.0 ± 1.8
46.9 ± 3.3
IC90
17.6 ± 0.8
113.6 ± 5.5
177.2 ± 33.4
aAdapted from Ramirez-Mares and others (2004).
IC10, IC50, IC90 = concentration needed to inhibit 10%, 50%, and 90% cell
growth, respectively.
SD = standard deviation.
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R145

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
T (human, peripheral blood, leukemia) cell extracts. Among all of
these compounds, 3,5-DCQ showed the highest inhibitory ability.
It is believed to act similarly to EGCG due to its similar structure
(Arbiser and others 2005).
Other compounds found in Mate have also been studied for their
chemopreventive properties. Rutin and quercetin are two that show
distinct cytotoxicity to HepG2 cells (Al´ıa and others 2006). Although
these compounds are found with small concentrations in Mate they
show the diversity of flavonoids present in Mate that contribute to
its anticancer potential.
Epidemiological studies. There has been a growing concern
over the fact that there are some epidemiological studies that sug-
gest an association between Mate consumption and increased risk
of developing certain cancers, namely, esophageal, oral, lung, blad-
der, renal, and other cancers of the head and neck (Pintos and oth-
ers 1994; De Stefani and others 1996, 1998; Goldenberg and others
2003; Bates and others 2007). These incidences have been highly
correlated to regions in which heavy Mate consumption persists,
portions of Brazil and Uruguay. However, it is also recognized that
other habitual factors may play a role, such as smoking and alco-
hol consumption, which are strongly associated with the culture of
these regions. Goldenberg (2002) and Goldenberg and others (2003,
2004) report of epidemiological studies showing increased rates of
squamous cell carcinoma with increased Mate consumption even
when other confounding factors such as smoking were present. The
results of these studies indicate that consuming more than 1 L of
Mate a day can increase the risk for head and neck cancer by 3 to
5 times, as well as an apparent association to lung cancer (Vassallo
and others 1985; De Stefani and others 1996; Sewram and others
2003). It was also reported that consuming strong and very hot tea
can increase the risk for oral cancer. Consuming other hot bever-
ages, coffee and green tea, also increased this risk by 2 to 4 times.
Thus, the measured risk of oral cancer may be due to thermal injury
(Rolon and others 1995; Castellsague and others 2000). With respect
tobladdercancer,againepidemiologicalstudiesbythesameleading
authors (De Stefani and others 1991) conducted in Uruguay showed
that a relationship between Mate and bladder cancer was found
when associated with smoking and to some degree in nonsmokers
aswell,thoughlessdefined.Inthesamestudy,itwasalsoshownthat
consumers of black tea and coffee had an increased risk of bladder
cancer. An epidemiological study conducted in Argentina showed
an increase risk of bladder cancer in Mate drinkers and smokers but
not in nonsmokers (Bates and others 2007). Whether this increased
risk of bladder cancer is due solely to Mate alone, smoking alone, a
combination of both, or solely another cause is unclear.
It should also be noted that the case studies of Mate consump-
tion and increased cancer incidence also include individuals that
consume black tobacco and alcohol, namely, wine. De Stefani and
others (1988) stated that there is a correlation to the increased risk
of oral cancers in those individuals who consume wine, Mate, and
smoke. This increase is also noted to be greater in those who smoke
black tobacco over blond tobacco. Again, there is no direct impli-
cation that any one factor contributes more to this increase in oral
cancers. Due to these other confounding factors, Mate may not be
a carcinogen on its own but, due to the high temperature at time of
consumption, may in fact be a means of increasing absorption for
the carcinogens found in cigarette smoke and other environmental
contaminants that are carcinogens or cancer promoters (Golden-
berg and others 2004).
On the other hand, there may be compounds present in Mate
that could contribute to cancer. Fagundes and others (2006) have
shown a correlation between the amount of Mate consumed and
theamountofpolycyclicaromatichydrocarbons(PAHs)inthebody.
It is known that PAHs, particularly benzo[a]pyrene, have carcino-
genic properties and that tobacco smoke and grilled meat contain
high concentrations of PAHs; at least 15 PAH compounds have been
found in Mate varieties. These compounds were isolated and iden-
tified by the utilization of stir bar sorptive extraction (SBSE) and
high-performance liquid chromatography–fluorescence detection
(HPLC–FLD) (Zuin and others 2005). Total PAHs found in various
Brazilian Mate samples ranged from 600 to 2300 ng/L, with naph-
thalene, acenaphthene, and phenanthrene having the highest con-
centrations. Table 6 shows the PAH compounds identified in Mate
and their average concentration in 11 Mate samples.
It is known that exposure to PAHs through tobacco smoke and
othersourcesmayincreasetheriskofesophagealsquamouscellcar-
cinoma (ESCC). Fagundes and others (2006) evaluated 200 healthy
adult Mate tea consumers, half male and half female with half being
smokers and half being nonsmokers, to determine the concentra-
tionsof1-hydroxypyreneglucuronide(1-OHPG),aPAHglucuronide
detoxification metabolite excreted in the urine. Their presence pro-
videsevidencethatanindividualhasbeenexposedtoPAHs.1-OHPG
can be measured in the urine using immunoaffinity chromatogra-
phy, synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy, and a urine cotinine
dipstick test; the tests were conducted by the Natl. Cancer Inst. at
JohnsHopkinsUniv.Thisstudyfoundthattherewasadirectcorrela-
tionbetweentheamountofMateconsumedandtheconcentrations
of PAHs in the urine, the higher the consumption the higher the con-
centrations. Table 7 shows the increasing concentrations of 1-OHPG
in the urine with increasing Mate consumption.
However, other than an increase in Mate consumption alone,
higherconcentrationsof1-OHPGcanalsobecorrelatedwithacom-
bination of smoking and Mate drinking. When Mate consumption is
combined with smoking, 1-OHPG concentrations are significantly
higher but Mate alone produces about the same concentrations of
1-OHPG on average as smoking alone (Fagundes and others 2006).
When examining a population in Campinas, SP, Brazil and the cof-
fee and Mate they consumed, PAHs were found in all products and
ranged from 10.12 μg/kg for coffee to 0.70 μg/kg for Mate (Rojo de
Camargo and others 2002). Considering the per capita average daily
consumption estimates in Brazil of 69.79 g of Mate tea, one can as-
sume that Mate tea contributes with approximately 0.05 μg of total
PAHs to the dietary intake of these contaminants by the studied
population (n = 600) (Rojo de Camargo and others 2002).
Table 6 --- Average concentration of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons found in Brazilian Mate tea samples.a
Compound
ng/L
Compound
ng/L
Acenaphthene
426.3
Benzo(b)ﬂuoranthene
11.4
Phenanthrene
347.5
Chrysene
10.5
Naphthalene
96.5
Benzo(a)anthracene
9.7
Fluoranthene
61.4
Indeno(1,2,3)pyrene
9.5
Pyrene
59.1
Benzo(g,h,i)perylened
7.7
Anthracene
50.9
Dibenz(a,h)anthracene
5.0
Fluorene
29.7
Benzo(k)ﬂuoranthene
3.6
Benzo(a)pyrene
12.2
aAdapted from Zuin and others (2005).
Table 7 --- Concentration of 1-hydroxypyrene glucuronide
(1-OHPG) in urine of humans.a
Mate consumption (mL/day)
1-OHPG (pmol/mL)
<100
1.01
>100
1.97
>500
3.24
>1000
4.06
aAdapted from Fagundes and others (2006).
R146
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Although there has been no proven biological correlation to the
drinking of Mate and developing cancer (Pereira Jotz and others
2006), the contamination with PAHs does present a plausible expla-
nation for increased rates of Mate drinking and cancer. It is highly
probable that PAHs are obtained in the processing, as Mate is com-
monly dried over a smoky wood fire. The smoke from the wood
may thus be producing the PAHs found in Mate. There also ap-
pears to be an apparent lack of new information on the subject.
Though a number of papers are published on the topic, no new
evidence has been presented. This is an area that warrants further
investigation.
Technological Considerations
Flavor and aroma
Consumer preference and perception are key attributes to any
food product and the same can be said for Mate tea. The driving
force behind sales and brand selection and consumer preference for
Mate brands is largely driven by smell and taste attributes. Generally
sensory panels do the analysis of these characteristics; however, it is
expensive and subject to susceptibility of the panelists. Therefore,
an automated method for aroma determination is needed. Grigioni
and others (2004) showed that the use of an E-nose can discriminate
among the aroma characteristics of Mate and correlates to that of
trained panelists.
It has been shown that there is a direct correlation between the
consumer preference for taste and aroma to the appearance of the
product (Cruz and others 2003; Schneider and others 2006). When
sensory panels are used, key terms must be generated to define
the flavor, aroma, and appearance of Mate products. Descriptors of
these characteristics that have shown to differentiate products are
showninTable8(SantaCruz2002;Cruzandothers2003).Consumer
panelists have also been used to test the bitterness (Calvino and
others 2004).
The aroma compounds found in Mate have also been charac-
terized using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry; while not
correlated to sensory analysis it does show the chemical make-up
of the volatile constituents of Mate. It was shown that Mate con-
tains more than 250 components, many of which are the same
as to green tea. However, a number of distinct components were
identified, namely, 2-butoxy-ethanol (in high concentrations), and
3,3,5-trimethylcyclohexanone-related compounds. Among the 196
volatile chemical compounds found in Yerba Mate tea, only 144 are
present in green tea (Kawakami and Kobayashi 1991).
Mate tea infusions can be made from green Mate, the dried
ground leaves, or roasted green Mate, where the dried leaves are
further roasted to enhance flavor. This roasting process has been
shown to have a dramatic effect on the flavor and aroma of the
Table 8 --- Yerba Mate sensory descriptors.a
Appearance
of Mate
Appearance of dry Mate
infusion
Flavor and aroma
Stick and leaf size
Sediment
Initial impact
Stick and leaf size uniformity
Turbidity
Acid
Quantity of sticks
Brown color
Humid
Quantity of dust
Smoke
Paper
Chemical
Green
Toasted
Residual
Bitterness
aAdapted from Cruz and others (2003).
tea. Numerous studies have been conducted to examine the volatile
compounds found in Mate. Roasted Mate showed higher concen-
trations of furans, pyrazines, and pyrroles compared to green Mate,
likely due to Maillard reactions (Kawakami and Kobayashi 1991).
Bastos and others (2006b) examined the essential oil extracts from
green and roasted Mate and found that roasted Mate contained sig-
nificantly less of the compounds responsible for the green-floral
aroma, that is, limonene, which are characteristics of green Mate.
They also found an increase in compounds such as methyl furfural
and furfural, which may be responsible for the smoky characteris-
tics of roasted Mate. Table 9 shows the volatile compounds found
in green and roasted Mate tea in comparison to black tea, identi-
fied with aroma analysis using solvent-assisted flavor evaporation–
solvent extraction (SAFE–SE). (Kawakami and Kobayashi 1991).
Lozano and others (2007) used 3 different methods to determine
the volatile aroma compounds present in Mate. SAFE–SE analysis
identifiedthehighestnumberofcompoundsfollowedbyadsorptive
columnextractionwitharomaextractdilutionanalysis(ACE–AEDA)
and dynamic headspace dilution analysis (DHDA), which found a
similar number of compounds. However, each method identified
compounds that were not identified with another method. There-
fore, it is recommended that multiple methods be used for the anal-
ysisofvolatilearomacompounds.Table10presentsthemainaroma
compounds and their characteristic odor identified with 3 different
methods for 1 Mate tea.
One of the defining characteristics of Mate teas is the perception
of bitterness. This characteristic can be attributed to caffeine (Ley
and others 2006; Keast and Roper 2007) as well as tannins (Drinkine
and others 2007) and saponins (Ma and others 1989). It should be
notedthatthepresenceofstems,oftenfoundinmostvarieties,could
significantly reduce the concentration of bitterness compared with
those without stems (Calvino 2005).
Compound extraction
While Mate is primarily consumed in a beverage form, made by
steeping the leaves of the plant in hot water, its high concentra-
tions of beneficial compounds make it an interesting subject for
extraction and purification of these compounds for use in the nu-
traceutical industry. The use of sonication has been shown to ef-
fectively eliminate high concentrations of compounds from Mate,
that is, caffeine and theobromine. However, this method is affected
by solvent polarity as well as extraction time and solvent to sample
mass ratio (Jacques and others 2007). The sonication method also
requires the use of organic solvents, methanol, and hexane, which
can be troublesome when the extracts are to be used for human con-
sumption.Becauseofthis,supercriticalCO2 extractionappearstobe
more promising for this extraction purpose. By utilizing supercriti-
calCO2 extraction,theconcentrationsofmethylxanthinesextracted
are much higher compared to other extraction methods. The use of
supercritical CO2 was investigated and was found to be an effec-
tive extraction method for caffeine, with yields of 98% total caffeine.
This method also showed that it is possible to extract theobromine.
It was also shown that supercritical CO2 has a higher affinity for caf-
feine than theobromine. When ethanol is utilized in the extraction
as well, extraction efficiency was improved by lowering solvent and
energy requirements (Saldana and others 1999; Saldana and others
2002).
The use of supercritical CO2 has now been employed for the anal-
ysis of Mate samples as a determination of quality differences. Sam-
ples of Mate were tested using CO2 extraction to examine changes
in the concentrations of caffeine, theobromine, phytol, vitamin E,
squalene, and stigmasterol due to differences in light exposure, dry-
ing method, and age of leaves (Esmelindro and others 2004). The
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R147

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
data showed that when products were protected from light there
was a dramatic increase in concentrations of caffeine, theobromine,
phytol,andonthesteroidstigmasterol,especiallycaffeineandtheo-
bromine, roughly 3 times higher. Light exposure appears to have no
effect on vitamin E concentration. Age of leaves played a role in
the amount of all compounds; younger leaves showed the highest
concentrations of all compounds. When alternative methods to air
drying were used, microwave drying allows for the greatest reten-
tion of compounds compared to vacuum drying. These findings are
significant because they show that light conditions during growing,
age of leaves, and drying method may play a role in the composition
of Mate and this would be important in the selection of products
for extraction in producing a high-quality extract (Esmelindro and
others 2004).
Final Considerations
W
hen comparing Mate to other teas such as green tea and black
tea, several differences can be observed. Most notably the fla-
vor and aroma, distinctly bitter Mate is often characterized as an
acquired taste. The roasted/smoky aromas are also often a much-
desired characteristic and ones that distinguish it from other teas.
It is not only the outward properties that distinguish it from other
teas but also its diverse concentration of biological compounds that
are not readily found in other teas. Most notably of these com-
pounds are the xanthines, theobromine, and theophylline that are
attributed to its ability to increase energy levels. The saponin con-
centration is also noteworthy in that they are not found with high
concentrations in other teas; the saponins contribute to the fla-
vor and may also be attributed to anti-inflammatory and hypoc-
holesterolemic properties characteristic to Mate as a medicinal
Table 9 --- Volatile compounds in green Mate and roasted Mate compared to Camellia sinensis tea (black tea).a
Green
Roast
Black
Green
Roast
Black
Compound
Mate
Mate
tea
Compound
Mate
Mate
tea
(E)-2,(E)-4-heptadienal
r
r
r
dihydroactinidiolide
r
r
r
(E)-2-decenal
r
r
r
eugenol
r
(E)-2-hexenal
r
r
r
furfural
r
r
r
(E)-2-pentenal
r
r
r
furfuryl alcohol
r
r
r
(E)-2-pentenol
r
r
r
geranial
r
r
r
(E)-2-undecenal
r
r
r
geraniol
r
r
r
(E)-3,(2)-5-octadien-2-one
r
r
r
geranylacetone
r
r
r
(E)-3,(E)-5-octadien-2-one
r
r
r
guaiacol
r
r
r
1,3,5-trimethyl-2-(1,3-butadienyl)benzene
r
r
heptanoic acid
r
r
r
2,10,10-trimethyl-6-methylidene-l-
r
heptanol
r
r
r
2,3-dihydro-2-methylbenzofuran
r
r
hexanal
r
r
r
2,6,6- trimethyl-2- hydroxycyclohexanone
r
r
r
hexanoic acid
r
r
r
2,6,6-trimethylcyclohex-2-enel,-4 –dione
r
r
r
I-penten-3 --- 01
r
r
r
2-acetylfuran
r
r
r
I-phenylpropanone
r
r
r
2-butoxyethanol
r
r
limonene
r
r
r
2-decanone
r
r
r
linalool
r
r
r
2-ethylfuran
r
r
r
linalool oxide I (cis, furanoid)
r
r
r
2-methyl-2-pentenal
r
r
linalool oxide II (trans, furanoid)
r
r
r
2-methyl-3-buten-2–01
r
r
r
linalool oxide III (cis, pyranoid)
r
r
2-methylbutanoic acid
r
r
r
linalool oxide IV (trans, pyranoid)
r
r
r
5,6-epoxy-ionone
r
r
r
methyl salicylate
r
r
r
5-methylfurfural
r
r
r
nerol
r
r
r
6,10,14-trimethylpentadecanone
r
r
r
nonanoic
r
r
r
6-methyl-(E)-3,5-heptadien-2-one
r
r
r
o-cresol
r
r
r
6-methyl-S-hepten-2-one
r
r
r
octanoic acid
r
r
r
acetic acid
r
r
r
octanol
r
r
r
a-ionone
r
r
r
pentanal
r
r
r
a-terpineol
r
r
r
pentanol
r
r
r
Benzaldehyde
r
r
r
phenol
r
r
r
benzyl alcohol
r
r
r
propionic acid
r
r
r
butyric acid
r
r
r
valeric acid
r
r
r
decanoic acid
r
r
r
β-ionone
r
r
r
aKawakami and Kobayashi (1991).
Compounds are 0.5% or more of total concentration.
herb. It should also be mentioned that, though Mate is high in
many compounds not found in other teas, it does not contain
catechins like green tea and is not as high in flavonoids as black
tea.
Most notably of Mate’s biological activities is its high antioxidant
capacity which has been shown to be higher than green tea, which is
touted as having a very high antioxidant capacity. This high antiox-
idant capacity is attributed and is directly proportional to its high
polyphenol concentration, namely, the caffeoyl derivatives. Due to
Mate’s high biological activity and its large concentration of known
active compounds it makes an ideal material for extraction of these
compounds for use in other foods and supplements. There are cur-
rently several products in the market that contain some derivatives
ofMate.Mostofwhicharetargetedatweightloss,asMatehasshown
a correlation with weight loss and weight management. Future re-
search will likely show more precise mechanisms for Mate’s actions
in these areas.
Contrary to the reported carcinogenic properties of Mate, there
are scientifically backed reports of anticancer effects. Mate tea has
beenshowntohaveahighcytotoxicityforcancercells,whichiseven
higher than that of green tea. Mate has also shown to be highly effec-
tive in inhibiting topoisomerase II, which is responsible for cell di-
vision and by inhibiting cancer cell proliferation. It has been shown
that oral cancer cells can be completely inhibited by treating them
with 375 μg of Mate extract/mL. It should also be noted that, though
Mate does not contain catechins, that is, EGCG, it does have com-
pounds that act similarly, such as 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid. This
compound has shown to be a potent proteasome inhibitor compa-
rable to EGCG, which has known proteasome inhibition activity and
is being investigated for cancer treatment.
R148
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Table 10 --- Main volatile aroma compounds in Mate found
by 3 different analytical methods.a
ACE-
Compound
SAFE
AEDA
DHDA
Odor
(E)-2-Decenal
r
r
Green, pungent
(E)-2-Nonenal
r
r
Hay
(E)-2-Octenal
r
r
r
Raw peanut
(E,E)-2,4-Hexadienal
r
Fatty, metalic
(E,Z)-2,6-Nonadienal
r
r
r
Cucumber
(Z)-1,5-Octadien-3-one
r
Metalic
(Z)-2-Nonenal
r
Melon, hay
(Z)-3-Hexenal
r
Green, cut-leaf
(Z)-4-Heptenal
r
r
Rancid
1,8-Cineole
r
r
Minty, eucalyptus
1-Hexen-3-one
r
r
Plastic
1-Oten-3-ol
r
r
r
Mushroom
1-Penten-3-one
r
r
r
Plastic, rancid
2,3-Butanedione
r
r
Buttery, creamy
2,3-methylbutanal
r
Chocolate
2,3-Pentanedione
r
Buttery, creamy
2-Acetyl-1-pyrroline
r
r
r
Roasty, popcorn
2-Acetyl-2-thiazoline
r
Roasty, popcorn
2-Acetylthiazole
r
r
Roasty, popcorn
Butanoic acid
r
r
r
Sweaty, cheesy
Citronellol
r
r
Fruity
Eugenol
r
r
r
Cloves, spicy
Furaneol
r
Burnt sugar
Geranial
r
r
r
Fruity, ﬂoral
Geraniol
r
r
r
Floral
Guaiacol
r
r
r
Smoky, medicine
Hexanal
r
Green, cut-grass
Hexanoic acid
r
r
Sweaty, body odor
Linalool
r
r
r
Floral
Maltol
r
Burnt sugar
Methional
r
r
r
Cooked potato
β-Damascenone
r
Cooked apple
Nonalactone
r
r
r
Coconut, sweet
o-Cresol
r
Phenolic, medicine
Octalactone
r
Fruity, ﬂoral
Octanal
r
Orange oil
p-Cresol
r
r
Phenolic, animal,
dung
Pentanoic acid
r
Sweaty, cheesy
p-Vinyl guaiacol
r
r
Cloves, spicy
Skatole
r
r
Urine, mothballs
Wine lactone
r
Plastic
β-Damascenone
r
r
Cooked apple
β-Ionone
r
r
r
Floral
aAdapted from Lozano and others (2007).
Conclusions
Y
erba Mate has been consumed for centuries but it has only been
scientifically studied in the last 2 decades. The growing world-
wide interest in Mate has made it paramount that research on this
herbal tea continues, as it has shown extraordinary possibilities not
only as a consumer beverage but also in the nutraceutical industry.
In regard to carcinogenesis, the most recent information suggests
thattheassociationbetweenMateconsumptionandtheoccurrence
of cancer may not be due to raw Mate itself but to contaminants that
may be present in processed Mate. The high temperature at which
Mate tea is consumed may also play a role. Therefore, postharvest
technologies need to be improved—especially the drying process
needs to be optimized to completely eliminate contaminants. Addi-
tionally, good quality control, including throughout analytical test-
ing, becomes imperative to insure its safety.
References
Alia M, Ramos S, Matcos R, Granado-Serrano AB, Bravo L, Goya L. 2006. Quercetin
protects human hepatoma HepG2 against oxidative stress induced by tert-butyl
hydroperoxide. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 212:110–8.
Amimoto K, Yoshikawa K, Arihara S. 1993. Triterpenes and triterpene glycosides from
the leaves of Ilex rotunda. Phytochem 33:1475–80.
Andersen T, Fogh J. 2001. Weight loss and delayed gastric emptying following a South
American herbal preparation in overweight patients. J Hum Nutr Diet 14:243–50.
Anesini C, Ferraro G, Filip R. 2006. Peroxidase-like activity of Ilex paraguariensis. Food
Chem 97:459–64.
Arbiser JL, Li XC, Hossain CF, Nagle DG, Smith DM, Miller P, Govindarajan B, DiCarlo J,
Landis-Piwowar KR, Dou QP. 2005. Naturally occurring proteasome inhibitors from
Mate tea (Ilex paraguayensis) serve as models for topical proteasome inhibitors. J
Invest Dermatol 125:207–12.
Athayde ML, Coelho GC, Schenkel EP. 2000. Caffeine and theobromine in epicuticular
wax of Ilex paraguariensis A. St-Hil Phytochem 55:853–7.
Atoui AK, Mansouri A, Boskou G, Kefalas P. 2005. Tea and herbal infusions: their an-
tioxidant activity ad phenolic profile. Food Chem 89:27–36.
Bastos DHM, Fornari AC, Queiroz YS, Torres EAFS. 2006a. Bioactive compounds con-
tent of Chimarrao infusions related to the moisture of Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguar-
iensis) leaves. Braz Arch Bio Tech 49:399–404.
Bastos DHM, Ishimoto EY, Marques MOM, Ferri AF, Torres EAFS. 2006b. Essential oil
and antioxidant activity of green Mate and Mate tea (Ilex paraguariensis) infusions.
J Food Comp Anal 19:538–43.
Bastos DHM, Saldanha LA, Catharino RR, Sawaya ACHF, Cunha IBS, Carvalho PO,
Eberlin MN. 2007. Phenolic antioxidants identified by ESI-MS from Yerba Mate (Ilex
paraguariensis) and green tea (Camelia sinensis) extracts. Molecules 12:423–32.
Bates MN, Hopenhayn C, Rey OA, Moore LE. 2007. Bladder cancer and Mate consump-
tion in Argentina: a case-control study. Cancer Lett 246:268–73.
Bixby M, Spieler L, Menini T, Gugliucci A. 2005. Ilex paraguariensis extracts are potent
inhibitors of nitrosative stress: a comparative study with green tea and wines using
a protein nitration model and mammalian cell cytotoxicity. Life Sci 77:345–58.
Bracesco N, Dell M, Rocha A, Behtash S, Menini T, Gugliucci A, Nunes E. 2003. Antiox-
idant activity of a botanical extract preparation of Ilex paraguariensis: prevention
of DNA double-strand breaks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human low-density
lipoprotein oxidation. J Altern Complement Med 9:379–87.
Bravo L, Goya L, Lecumberri E. 2007. LC/MS characterization of phenolic constituents
of Mate (Ilex paraguariensis, St. Hil.) and its antioxidant activity compared to com-
monly consumed beverages. Food Res Int 40:393–405.
Calvino A. 2005. Note. Caffeine content and dynamical bitterness of Yerba Mate Ilex
paraguariensis infusions. Food Sci Tech Int 11:401–7.
Calvino A, Fraga SG, Garrido D. 2004. Effects of sampling conditions on temporal
perception of bitterness in Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) infusions. J Sens Stud
19:193–210.
CarducciCN,DabasPC,MuseJO.2000.Determinationofinorganiccationsbycapillary
ionelectrophoresisinIlexparaguariensis(St.H.),aplantusedtoprepareteainSouth
America. J AOAC Int 83:1167–73.
Carini M, Facino RM, Aldini G, Calloni M, Colombo L. 1998. Characterization of phe-
nolic antioxidants from Mate (Ilex paraguayensis) by liquid chromatography mass
spectrometry and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Com-
mun in Mass Spec 12:1813–9.
Castellsague X, Munoz N, De Stefani E, Victora CG, Castelletto R, Rolon PA. 2000.
Influence of Mate drinking, hot beverages and diet on esophageal cancer risk in
South America. Int J Cancer 88:658–64.
Chandra S, De Mejia GE. 2004. Polyphenolic compounds, antioxidant capacity, and
quinonereductaseactivityofanaqueousextractofArdisiacompressaincomparison
to Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) and green (Camellia sinensis) teas. J Agric Food Chem
52:3583–90.
Choi YH, Sertic S, Kim HK, Wilson EG, Michopoulos F, Lefeber AWM, Erkelens
C, PratKricun SD, Verpoorte R. 2005. Classification of Ilex species based on
metabolomic fingerprinting using nuclear magnetic resonance and multivariate
data analysis. J Agric Food Chem 53:1237–45.
Cruz MJS, Garitta LV, Hough G. 2003. Note: Relationships of consumer acceptability
and sensory attributes of Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguariensis St. Hilarie) using prefer-
ence mapping. Food Sci Tech Int 9:347–52.
Dall’Orto VC. 2005. Comparison of tyrosinase biosensor and colorimetric method for
polyphenol analysis in different kinds of teas. Anal Lett 38:19–33.
DeStefaniE,CorreaP,OreggiaF,Deneo-PellegriniH,FernandezG,ZavalaD,Carzoglio
J, Leiva J, Fontham E, Rivero S. 1988. Black tobacco, wine and Mate in oropharyngeal
cancer. A case-control study from Uruguay. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique 36:389–
94.
De Stefani E, Correa P, Fierro L, Fontham E, Chen V, Zavala D. 1991. Black tobacco,
Mate, and bladder cancer. A case-control study from Uruguay. Cancer 67:536–40.
DeStefaniE,FierroL,CorreaP,FonthamE,RoncoA,LarrinagaM,BalbiJ,Mendilaharsu
M. 1996. Mate drinking and risk of lung cancer in males: a case-control study from
Uruguay. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 5:515–9.
De Stefani E, Fierro L, Mendilaharsu M, Ronco A, Larrinaga MT, Balbi JC, Alonso
S, Deneo-Pellegrini H. 1998. Meat intake, ’Mate’ drinking and renal cell cancer in
Uruguay: a case-control study. Br J Cancer 78:1239–43.
De Stefani E, Boffetta P, Deneo-Pellegrini H, Correa P, Ronco A, Brennan P, Ferro G,
AcostaG,MendilaharsuM.2007.Non-alcoholicbeveragesandriskofbladdercancer
in Uruguay. BMC Cancer 7:57.
Dickel ML, Rates SM, Ritter MR. 2007. Plants popularly used for losing weight purposes
in Porto Alegre, South Brazil. J Ethnopharmacol 109:60–71.
Drinkine J, Lopes P, Kennedy JA, Teissedre PL, Saucier C. 2007. Ethylidene-bridged
flavan-3-ols in red wine and correlation with wine age. J Agric Food Chem 55:6292–
9.
Duke JA. 1992. Handbook of phytochemical constituents of GRAS herbs and other
economic plants. Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press.
EPA National Primary Drinking Water Standards. June 2003. 816-F-03-016. Office
of Water (4606M). Available from: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/contaminats/
index.html. Accessed July 10 2007.
Esmelindro AA, Girardi JDS, Mossi A, Jacques RA, Dariva C. 2004. Influence of agro-
nomic variables on the composition of Mate tea leaves (Ilex paraguariensis) extracts
obtained from CO2 extraction at 30 degrees C and 175 bar. J Agric Food Chem
52:1990–5.
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R149

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Fagundes RB, Abnet CC, Strickland PT, Kamangar F, Roth MJ, Taylor PR, Dawsey SM.
2006. Higher urine 1-hydroxy pyrene glucuronide (1-OHPG) is associated with to-
bacco smoke exposure and drinking Mate in healthy subjects from Rio Grande do
Sul, Brazil. BMC Cancer 6:139–45.
FAOSTAT.
c⃝Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) Statistics Division 2007.
Available
from:
http://faostat.fao.org/site/408/DesktopDefault.aspx?PageID=
408. Accessed Sept 12 2007.
Ferreira F. 1997. Inhibition of the passive diffusion of cholic acid by the Ilex paraguar-
iensis St Hil saponins. Phytotherapy Res 11:79–81.
Filip R, Ferraro GE. 2003. Researching on new species of ”Mate”: Ilex brevicuspis: phy-
tochemical and pharmacology study. Eur J Nutr 42:50–4.
Filip R, Lopez P, Coussio J, Ferraro G. 1998. Mate substitutes or adulterants: study of
xanthine content. Phytotherapy Res 12:129–31.
Filip R, Lotito SB, Ferraro G, Fraga CG. 2000. Antioxidant activity of Ilex paraguariensis
and related species. Nutr Res 20:1437–46.
Filip R, Lopez P, Giberti G, Coussio J, Ferraro G. 2001. Phenolic compounds in seven
South American Ilex species. Fitoterapia 72:774–8.
Fonseca CA, Otto SS, Paumgartten FJ, Leitao AC. 2000. Nontoxic, mutagenic, and clas-
togenic activities of Mate-Chimarrao (Ilex paraguariensis). J Environ Pathol Toxicol
Oncol 19:333–46.
Giberti GC. 1994. Mate (Ilex paraguariensis). In: Hern´ando BJE, Le´on J, editors. Ne-
glected crops: 1492 from a different perspective. Plant Production and Protection
Series No. 26 ed. Rome, Italy: FAO. p 252–4.
Giulian R, IochimsdosSantos CE, de Moraes Shubeita S, da Silva LM, Dias JF, Yoneama
ML. 2007. Elemental characterization of commercial Mate tea leaves (Ilex paraguar-
iensis A. St.-Hil.) before and after hot water infusion using ion beam techniques. J
Agric Food Chem 55:741–6.
Gnoatto SCB, Schenkel EP, Bassani VL. 2005. HPLC method to assay total saponins in
Ilex paraguariensis aqueous extract. J Braz Chem Soc 16:723–6.
Goldenberg D. 2002. Mate: a risk factor for oral and oropharyngeal cancer. Oral Oncol
38:646–9.
Goldenberg D, Golz A, Joachims HZ. 2003. The beverage Mate: a risk factor for cancer
of the head and neck. Head Neck 25:595–601.
Goldenberg D, Lee J, Koch WM, Kim MM, Trink B, Sidransky D, Moon CS. 2004. Ha-
bitual risk factors for head and neck cancer. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 131:986–
93.
Gonzalez A, Ferreira F, Vazquez A, Moyna P, Paz EA. 1993. Biological screening of
Uruguayan medicinal-plants. J Ethnopharmacol 39:217–20.
Gonzalez de Mejia E, Song YS, Ramirez-Mares MV, Kobayashi H. 2005. Effect of Yerba
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) tea on topoisomerase inhibition and oral carcinoma cell
proliferation. J Agric Food Chem 53:1966–73.
Gorgen M, Turatti K, Medeiros AR, Buffon A, Bonan CD, Sarkis JJ, Pereira GS. 2005.
Aqueous extract of Ilex paraguariensis decreases nucleotide hydrolysis in rat blood
serum. J Ethnopharmacol 97:73–7.
Gorzalczany S, Filip R, Alonso MR, Mino J, Ferraro GE, Acevedo C. 2001. Choleretic
effect and intestinal propulsion of ’Mate’ (Ilex paraguariensis) and its substitutes or
adulterants. J Ethnopharmacol 75:291–4.
Gosmann G, Guillaume D, Taketa AT, Schenkel EP. 1995. Triterpenoid saponins from
Ilex paraguariensis. J Nat Prod 58:438–41.
Graham HN. 1992. Green tea composition, consumption, and polyphenol chemistry.
Prev Med 21:334–50.
Grigioni G, Carduza F, Irurueta M, Pensel N. 2004. Flavour characteristics of Ilex
paraguariensis infusion, a typical Argentine product, assessed by sensory evalu-
ation and electronic nose. J Sci Food Agric 84:427–32.
Gugliucci A. 1996. Antioxidant effects of Ilex paraguariensis: induction of decreased
oxidability of human LDL in vivo. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 224:338–44.
Gugliucci A, Menini T. 2002. The botanical extracts of Achyrocline satureoides and
Ilex paraguariensis prevent methylglyoxal-induced inhibition of plasminogen and
antithrombin III. Life Sci 72:279–92.
Gugliucci A, Stahl AJ. 1995. Low density lipoprotein oxidation is inhibited by extracts
of Ilex paraguariensis. Biochem Mol Biol Int 35:47–56.
Hara Y. 2001. Green tea: health benefits and applications. New York: Marcel Dekker
Inc. p 16–20.
Heck C, de Mejia E. 2007. Polyphenols in Mate tea depend on cultivation and prepara-
tion conditions. Symposium on functional plant phenolics: analysis and evaluation.
Amer Chem Soc. AGFD 141.
Ito E, Crozier A, Ashihara H. 1997. Theophylline metabolism in higher plants. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1336:323–30.
Jacques RA, dos Santos Freitas L, Perez VF, Dariva C, de Oliveira AP, de Oliveira JV,
Caramao EB. 2007. The use of ultrasound in the extraction of Ilex paraguariensis
leaves: a comparison with maceration. Ultrason Sonochem 14:6–12.
Kawakami M, Kobayashi A. 1991. Volatile constituents of green mate and roasted mate.
J Agric Food Chem 39:1275–9.
Keast RS, Roper J. 2007. A complex relationship among chemical concentration, de-
tection threshold, and suprathreshold intensity of bitter compounds. Chem Senses
32:245–53.
Kraemer KH, Taketa AT, Schenkel EP, Gosmann G, Guillaume D. 1996. Matesaponin
5, a highly polar saponin from Ilex paraguariensis. Phytochemistry 42:1119–
22.
Leitao AC, Braga RS. 1994. Mutagenic and genotoxic effects of Mate (Ilex paraguarien-
sis) in prokaryotic organisms. Braz J Med Biol Res 27:1517–25.
Ley JP, Blings M, Paetz S, Krammer GE, Bertram HJ. 2006. New bitter-masking com-
pounds: hydroxylated benzoic acid amides of aromatic amines as structural ana-
logues of homoeriodictyol. J Agric Food Chem 54:8574–9.
Lozano PR, Cadwallader KR, Gonzalez de Mejia E. 2007. Identification of characteristic
aroma components of Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) Tea. In: Tunick MH, de Mejia EG,
editors. Hispanic foods: chemistry and flavor. Washington, D.C.: Amer Chem Soc.
p 143–50.
Lunceford N, Gugliucci A. 2005. Ilex paraguariensis extracts inhibit AGE formation
more efficiently than green tea. Fitoterapia 76:419–27.
Ma WW, Heinstein PF, McLaughlin JL. 1989. Additional toxic, bitter saponins from the
seeds of Chenopodium quinoa. J Nat Prod 52:1132–5.
Marchisio PF, Sales A, Cerutti S, Marchevski E, Martinez LD. 2005. On-line precon-
centration/determination of lead in Ilex paraguariensis samples (Mate tea) using
polyurethane foam as filter and USN-ICP-OES. J Hazard Mater 124:113–8.
MartinetA,HostettmannK,SchutzY.1999.Thermogeniceffectsofcommerciallyavail-
able plant preparations aimed at treating human obesity. Phytomedicine 6:231–8.
Martinet A, Ndjoko K, Terreaux C, Marston A, Hostettmann K, Schutz Y. 2001. NMR
and LC-MSn characterisation of two minor saponins from Ilex paraguariensis. Phy-
tochem Anal 12:48–52.
MazzaferaP.1997.Matedrinking:caffeineandphenolicacidintake.FoodChem60:67–
71.
Mosimann AL, Wilhelm-Filho D, da Silva EL. 2006. Aqueous extract of Ilex paraguar-
iensis attenuates the progression of atherosclerosis in cholesterol-fed rabbits. Bio-
factors 26:59–70.
Muccillo Baisch AL, Johnston KB, Paganini Stein FL. 1998. Endothelium-dependent
vasorelaxingactivityofaqueousextractsofIlexparaguariensisonmesentericarterial
bed of rats. J Ethnopharmacol 60:133–9.
Newell AMB, Chandra S, Gonzalez de Mejia E. 2007. Ethnic teas and their bioactive
components. In: Tunick MH, de Mejia EG, editors. Hispanic foods: chemistry and
flavor. Washington, D.C.: Amer Chem Soc. p 127–31.
Opala T, Rzymskip P, Pischel I, Wilczak M, Wozniak J. 2006. Efficacy of 12 weeks sup-
plementation of a botanical extract-based weight loss formula on body weight, body
composition and blood chemistry in healthy, overweight subjects – a randomised
double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Eur J Med Res 11:343–50.
Osanai K, Landis-Piwowar KR, Dou QP, Chan TH. 2007. A para-amino substituent on
the D-ring of green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin-3-gallateas a novel proteasome
inhibitor and cancer cell apoptosis inducer. Bioorg Med Chem 15:5076–82.
OuyangMA,LiuYQ,WangHQ,YangCR.1998.TriterpenoidsaponinsfromIlexlatifolia.
Phytochem 49:2483–6.
Paganini Stein FL, Schmidt B, Furlong EB, Souza-Soares LA, Soares MC, Vaz MR,
Muccillo Baisch AL. 2005. Vascular responses to extractable fractions of Ilex
paraguariensis in rats fed standard and high-cholesterol diets. Biol Res Nurs 7:146–
56.
Pavei C, Guzatto P, Petrovick P, Gosmann G, Gonzalez-Ortega G. 2007. Development
andvalidationofanHPLCmethodforthecharacterizationandassayofthesaponins
from Ilex paraguariensis A. St.-Hill (Mate) fruits. J Liquid Chromatogr Related Tech
30:87–95.
Pereira Jotz G, Sampaio Menezes H, Galleano Zetter C, Vargas Alves RJ, Chacur R,
Buzzatti C, Dias de Oliveira M, Maeso Montes TH, H¨ubner M, Walker Zettler E. 2006.
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) as an etiological agent of neoplasia in the aerodigestive
tract. An experimental study. Intl Arch Otorhinolaryngol S˜ao Paulo 10:306–11.
Pintos J, Franco EL, Oliveira BV, Kowalski LP, Curado MP, Dewar R. 1994. Mate, coffee,
andteaconsumptionandriskofcancersoftheupperaerodigestivetractinsouthern
Brazil. Epidemiology 5:583–90.
Pires VS, Guillaume D, Gosmann G, Schenkel EP. 1997. Saponins from Ilex dumosa, an
Erva-Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) adulterating plant. J Agric Food Chem 45:1027–31.
Pires VS, Gosmann G, Guillaume D, Schenkel EP. 2002. Triterpenes and saponins from
Ilex psammophila. Nat Prod Lett 16:401–6.
PittlerMH,ErnstE.2004.Dietarysupplementsforbody-weightreduction:asystematic
review. Am J Clin Nutr 79:529–36.
Pomilio AB, Trajtemberg S, Vitale AA. 2002. High-performance capillary electrophore-
sis analysis of Mate infusions prepared from stems and leaves of Ilex paraguariensis
usingautomatedmicellarelectrokineticcapillarychromatography.PhytochemAnal
13:235–41.
Ramirez-Mares MV, Chandra S, de Mejia EG. 2004. In vitro chemopreventive activity
of Camellia sinensis, Ilex paraguariensis and Ardisia compressa tea extracts and
selected polyphenols. Mutat Res 554:53–65.
Reginatto FH, Athayde ML, Gosmann G, Schenkel EP. 1999. Methylxanthines accumu-
lation in Ilex species – Caffeine and theobromine in erva-Mate (Ilex paraguariensis)
and other Ilex species. J Braz Chem Soc 10:443–6.
Rojo de Camargo, CM, Toledo MCF. 2002. Coffee and Mate tea as a dietary source of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAHs) in Campinas. Food Sci Tech 22:49–53.
Rolon PA, Castellsague X, Benz M, Munoz N. 1995. Hot and cold Mate drinking and
esophageal cancer in Paraguay. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:595–605.
Saldana MD, Mohamed RS, Baer MG, Mazzafera P. 1999. Extraction of purine alkaloids
from Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) using supercritical CO2. J Agric Food Chem 47:
3804–8.
Saldana MD, Zetzl C, Mohamed RS, Brunner G. 2002. Extraction of methylxanthines
fromguaranaseeds,Mateleaves,andcocoabeansusingsupercriticalcarbondioxide
and ethanol. J Agric Food Chem 50:4820–6.
Santa Cruz MJ. 2002. Sensory descriptive analysis of Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguariensis
Saint Hilaire), a South American beverage. Food Sci Tech Int 8:25–31.
Schinella GR, Troiani G, Davila V, de Buschiazzo PM, Tournier HA. 2000. Antioxidant
effects of an aqueous extract of Ilex paraguariensis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
269:357–60.
Schinella G, Fantinelli JC, Mosca SM. 2005. Cardioprotective effects of Ilex paraguar-
iensisextract:evidenceforanitricoxide-dependentmechanism.ClinNutr24:360–6.
Schmalko ME, Alzamora SM. 2001. Color, chlorophyll, caffeine, and water content
variation during Yerba Mate processing. Drying Tech 19(3&4):599–610.
Schmalko ME, Scipioni PG, Ferreyra DJ. 2005. Effect of water activity and temperature
on color and chlorophylls changes in Yerba Mate leaves. Int J Food Prop 8:313–22.
Schneider E, Scherer RA, Janssens MJJ. 2006. Mate from Argentina – production, sen-
sory analysis, use. Dtsch Lebensm -Rundsch 102:313–8.
Schubert A, Zanin FF, Pereira DF, Athayde ML. 2006. Annual variations of mehtylxan-
thines in Ilex paraguariensis A. St. Hil (Mate) samples in Ijui and Santa Maria, State
of Rio Grande Do Sul. Quim Nova 29:1233–6.
Sewram V, De Stefani E, Brennan P, Boffetta P. 2003. Mate consumption and the risk of
squamous cell esophageal cancer in Uruguay. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
12:508–13.
SmallE,CatlingPM.2001.Blossomingtreasuresofbiodiversity: 3.Mate(Ilexparaguar-
iensis) – better than Viagra, marijuana, and coffee? Biodiversity 2:26–7.
Taketa AT. 2004. Triterpenes and triterpenoidal glycosides from the fruits of Ilex
paraguariensis (Mate). J Braz Chem Soc 15:205–11.
R150
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007

R: Concise Reviews in Food Science
Yerba Mate tea: a comprehensive review . . .
Taketa AT, Schmittmann-Schlager T, Guillaume D, Gosmann G, Schenkel EP. 2000.
Triterpenoid glycosides and a triterpene from Ilex brevicuspis. Phytochem 53:901–
4.
Taketa AT, Gnoatto SC, Gosmann G, Pires VS, Schenkel EP, Guillaume D. 2004. Triter-
penoids from Brazilian Ilex species and their in vitro antitrypanosomal activity. J
Nat Prod 67:1697–700.
Tenorio Sanz MD, Torija Isasa ME. 1991. Mineral elements in Mate herb (Ilex paraguar-
iensis St. H.). Arch Latinoam Nutr 41:441–54.
Turkmen N, Sari F, Velioglu YS. 2006. Effects of extraction solvents on concen-
tration and antioxidant activity of black and black Mate tea polyphenols de-
termined by ferrous tartrate and Folin-Ciocalteu methods. Food Chem 99:835–
41.
USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 2007. Germplasm Resources
Information Network (GRIN) [Online Database]. Beltsville, Maryland: Natl.
Germplasm Resources Laboratory. Available from: http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?19756. Accessed Feb 16 2007.
VanderJagt TJ, Ghattas R, VanderJagt DJ, Crossey M, Glew RH. 2002. Comparison of
the total antioxidant content of 30 widely used medicinal plants of New Mexico. Life
Sci 70:1035–40.
Vassallo A, Correa P, De Stefani E, Cendan M, Zavala D, Chen V, Carzoglio J, Deneo-
PellegriniH.1985.EsophagealcancerinUruguay:acase-controlstudy.JNatlCancer
Inst 75:1005–9.
Vera Garcia R, Basualdo I, Peralta I, de Herebia M, Caballero S. 1997. Minerals content
of Paraguayan Yerba Mate (Ilex paraguariensis, S.H.). Arch Latinoam Nutr 47:77–80.
Wrobel K, Wrobel K, Urbina EM. 2000. Determination of total aluminum, chromium,
copper, iron, manganese, and nickel and their fractions leached to the infusions of
black tea, green tea, Hibiscus sabdariffa, and Ilex paraguariensis (Mate) by ETA-AAS.
Biol Trace Elem Res 78:271–80.
Yamamoto T, Juneja LR, Chu DC, Kim M, editors. 1997. Chemistry and applications of
green tea. New York: CRC Press. p 61–73.
Yano I, Nishiizumi C, Yochikawa K, Arihars S. 1993. Triterpenoid saponins from Ilex
integra. Phytochem 32:417–20.
Zaporozhets OA, Krushynska OA, Lipkovska NA, Barvinchenk VN. 2004. A new test
method for the evaluation of total antioxidant activity of herbal products. J Agric
Food Chem 52:21–5.
Zuin VG, Montero L, Bauer C, Popp P. 2005. Stir bar sorptive extraction and high-
performance liquid chromatography-fluorescence detection for the determination
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Mate teas. J Chromatogr A 1091:2–10.
Vol. 72, Nr. 9, 2007—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE
R151
