Botanical Extracts Used in the Treatment of Cellulite
DORIS HEXSEL, MD,✽CECILIA ORLANDI, MD,† AND DEBORA ZECHMEISTER DO PRADO, PHARM‡✽
✽Doris Hexsel Dermatologic Clinic, Brazil; †Clínica Orlandi, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile; ‡Doris Hexsel Dermatologic
Clinic, Brazil
BACKGROUND. Cellulite is defined as skin relief alterations that
give the skin an orange peel or mattress appearance. The lesions
tend to be asymptomatic and may be considered the anatomic
expressions of the structures in the affected area, such as the fat
and subcutaneous septa.
OBJECTIVE. The present article reviews the most important botan-
ical extracts used as active ingredients in the treatment of cel-
lulite, as well as the steps to obtain these botanicals as raw mate-
rial and their standardization and quality control, which are
important to guarantee their therapeutic action.
METHODS. The current literature was reviewed, and we also
obtained information from the manufacturers of the prducts that
contained botanicals because of the few publications about this
subject.
CONCLUSIONS. The reduction in fat deposits through the contin-
uous use of anticellulite products depends on the availability of
the active ingredient at the action site, the concentration of the
ingredient in the formulation, and the physiochemical character-
istics particular to each active ingredient. The botanicals used in
topical products must have standardized extracts, which would
permit each phytomedicine to have the same effect anywhere in
the world. New scientific research is necessary to verify the effi-
cacy and ideal concentrations of such substances.
© 2005 by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, Inc. • Published by BC Decker Inc
ISSN: 1076–0512 • Dermatol Surg 2005;31:866–872.
DORIS HEXSEL, MD, CECILIA ORLANDI, MD, AND DEBORA ZECHMEISTER DO PRADO, PHARM, HAVE
INDICATED NO SIGNIFICANT INTEREST WITH COMMERCIAL SUPPORTERS.
THE TERM “cellulite” is used to characterize alterations
to the skin surface that give the skin an orange peel or mat-
tress appearance. It usually occurs in females, and the most
affected areas are the thighs and buttocks. In recent years,
people have been looking for more “natural” products,
and an increasing number of botanical extracts are avail-
able to treat not only diseases but also cosmetic problems,
such as cellulite.1–4 The active botanical ingredients used in
topical products for the treatment of cellulite should be
capable of activating the circulation and aiding fat metab-
olism and lymphatic drainage. They can be administered
orally or topically as creams, gels, or lotions or by
mesotherapy, a method involving local injections that is
used in some countries.
This article reviews the most important botanical
extracts used as active ingredients in the treatment of cel-
lulite, as well as the steps to obtain these botanicals as raw
material and their standardization and quality control,
which are important to guarantee their therapeutic action.
Cellulite
Cellulite is also called edematous sclerotic-fibrous-
edematous paniculopathy atrophic panniculitis, cellulitic
hypodermosis, panniculosis of the dermis, gynoid lipody-
strophy, and multiple other names.5–7 It results from many
complex events that involve the epidermis, dermis, and
subcutaneous tissue.8 The most current theory is that of
lymphatic drainage disruption, which states that the
obstruction of both lymphatic and vascular flow leads to
an increase in localized fat, leading to cellulite.1
Cellulite affects the majority of postadolescent women
and is usually related to the influence of estrogens. These
hormones lead to the production and retention of fat,
especially in the buttocks and thighs. The number of
adipocytes in certain regions in women is five times larger
than in other regions.9
The orientation and anchoring of fascial bands from
the dermis to the deep fascia are vertical in women. These
bands form fibrous septa, which constitute real “pockets”
that store fat in a way similar to a mattress, and the fat is
projected into the reticular and papillary dermis. An
increase in dermal glycosaminoglycans has been found in
these areas, and they produce greater water binding. When
the process of cellulite progresses, the nerves and capillar-
ies that run through the septa are compressed and may
produce localized pain in the palpable nodules. They may
also be strongly involved in the pathophysiology of this
condition. The qualitative and quantitative modification
All pictures in this article were taken by one of the authors (D.H.) at
the Botanical Gardens in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Doris Hexsel,
Plinio Brasil Milano 476 90520–000, Porto Alegre RS, Brazil, or e-
mail: dohexsel@terra.com.br.

Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE 867
of fatty acids is produced by peroxidation by free radicals.
All of these phenomena contribute to the worsening of
microcirculation in lymphatic and venous systems and dis-
rupt venous and lymphatic drainage.10
Most treatment methods work by stimulating lym-
phatic and vascular flow and drainage. Adipose cell fat
comes from plasma-circulating lipoproteins. There is a
dynamic process in which the stored fat is hydrolyzed and
eliminated again to the plasma as free fatty acids and glyc-
erol. Different enzymes, such as insulin and cyclic adeno-
sine monophosphate (AMP), participate in this process.
On the surface of the adipocyte, there are receptors that
promote the storing of fat and lipogenesis, such as 2 and
neuropeptide Y. On the other hand, there are other recep-
tors that promote the elimination of fat and lipolysis, such
as 1 and 2.11
Triglyceride lipase is the most important enzyme that
promotes lipolysis. This enzyme is activated by adenyl
cyclase stimulation by means of an antagonist effect. This
inhibitory process causes triacylglycerol hydrolysis and
releases free fatty acids and glycerol into the interstitial
space and plasma.3
Cellulite Botanical Formulation Design
The clinical efficacy of botanical formulations depends not
only on the pharmacologic properties of the active ingre-
dient but also on its availability at the action site.12–14
The botanical extracts contained on topical products
need to pass through the corneal stratum, which repre-
sents the main barrier, and reach the inner layers of the
skin. However, the clinical efficacy of many active ingre-
dients is limited owing to their inability to penetrate this
barrier.13,14 For this reason, topical formulations include
skin enhancers, which are substances capable of augment-
ing cutaneous penetration of the active ingredients. Skin
enhancers are the solvents, vehicles, and surfactants that
are selected on technical criteria, according to the physico-
chemical characteristics of each active ingredient. In recent
years, advances in the pharmaceutical industry have led to
new technologies, which facilitate the delivery of the active
ingredients to the action site.
Formulations taken orally or via injection also have to
reach the action site. Such formulations also include ele-
ments that facilitate the delivery of the active ingredients
to the action site and are designed to have good absorption
and a low incidence of secondary effects. The main con-
cern with products taken orally is that their action mech-
anism is not debilitated during their passage through the
liver. Although the design of injectables is more detailed,
among other cautions, extreme care should be taken to
ensure the sterility of the formulation.
Active Botanical Ingredients of the Products
Employed in the Treatment of Cellulite
The aim of using active substances in topical treatments
for cellulite is to reduce lipogenesis and activate lipolysis,
helping to restore the normal structure of the subcuta-
neous tissue13 and acting as anti–free radicals. These active
ingredients should be capable of stimulating the circula-
tion and aiding fat metabolism and lymphatic drainage.15
Such products normally come in the form of creams,
lotions, and gels.
Methylxanthines
Methylxanthines are classified as -agonists and are the
main category with documented action in the treatment of
cellulite.3,8,16,17 The main methylxanthines obtained from
botanical extracts are caffeine, theobromine, and theo-
phylline.
The most useful and safest methylxanthine is caffeine,
which is normally used at a concentration of 1 to 2%. It
penetrates the skin very easily, which facilitates its absorp-
tion and action.18 Caffeine acts directly on adipose cells,
Table 1. Principal Methylxanthines and Respective Plants (Fonts) Used in Cellulite Treatment
Methylxanthine
Botanical Species
Caffeine
Coffee, Coffea arabica (Rubiaceae) originally from Ethiopia (Figure 1)
Green tea, Camellia sinensis L (Theaceae), originally from China, Japan, and Indonesia
Cacao, Theobroma cacao L (Sterculiaceae), originally from the Amazon rain forest
Guarana, Paullinea cupana, Paullinea sorbilis (Spindaceae), originally from the Amazon rain forest
Maté, Ilex paraguariensis (Aquifoliaceae), originally from South America
Cola or African colatier, cola nut, Cola acuminata, originally from Africa
Theobromine
Green tea, Camellia sinensis L (Theaceae), originally from China, Japan, and Indonesia
Cacao, Theobroma cacao L (Sterculiaceae), originally from the Amazon rain forest (Figure 2)
Black tea, Thea sinensis R (Theaceae), originally from the Himalayas
Maté, Ilex paraguariensis (Aquifoliaceae), originally from South America
Theophylline
Green tea, Camellia sinensis L (Theaceae), originally from China, Japan, and Indonesia
Cacao, Theobroma cacao L (Sterculiaceae), originally from the Amazon rain forest (see Figure 2)
Black tea, Thea sinensis R (Theaceae), originally from the Himalayas
Maté, Ilex paraguariensis (Aquifoliaceae), originally from South America

868
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE
Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
promoting lipolysis, inhibiting phosphodiesterase, and thus
augmenting cyclic AMP.3 They activate the triglyceride
lipase enzyme and transform triglycerides into free acids
and glycerol. Caffeine also has a stimulating effect on the
cutaneous microcirculation. A clinical study testing caffeine
demonstrated the efficacy of this substance. The better
reported results were with caffeine included in liposomes.19
The methylxanthines used in cellulite treatments are
usually obtained from the leaves of the species listed below
(Table 1).
Clinical studies show increasing levels of free fatty acids
in plasma after the topical application of these com-
pounds, demonstrating a lipolytic effect.20 Plasmatic con-
centration of caffeine, after 1 month of topical use of 1 g
daily in a hydroalcoholic gel, is equivalent to 25% of the
quantity we get after drinking one cup of coffee.21
There are reports of allergic reactions to topical prod-
ucts containing caffeine.22 There are also reports of cases of
dermatitis in workers who handle the coffee grains, owing
to the volatile oils present as constituents of the plant.23
Bladderwrack (Fuccus vesiculosus L.)
Bladderwrack is a brown marine algae that contains sul-
fated polysaccharides, iodine compounds, and alginic acid.
It belongs to the family Fucaceae and is found on the shore
of the north Pacific and north Atlantic oceans. The part
used for the elaboration of the extract is the whole dried
thallus.24
Bladderwrack is reported to produce the contraction of
the fibroblast-populated collagen gel through the
increased expression of integrin molecules.25,26 The extract
of this plant is usually used at a concentration of 1%.6 In
cellulite, its action is related to the increased density of the
connective tissue, and it has a stimulating effect on vascu-
lar flow.
Butcher’s Broom (Ruscus aculeatus)
This phytomedicine is from the Liliaceae family, and its
habitat and range are woods, bushy places, and dry hills
in Europe.24
This is a potent venous vasoconstrictor agent, and it has
a diminishing edema effect. It acts as an agonist on -
adrenergic receptors of the smooth muscle of veins and
reduces vascular permeability.27 In the elaboration of the
Figure 1. (A and B) The Coffea arabica plant from which caffeine is
extracted for use in the topical treatment of cellulite.
Figure 2. Theophylline is obtained from the Theobroma cacao L.
plant.
A
B

extract of butcher’s broom, the rhizome and flowering tops
are used because they contain the main active ingredients,
saponins, ruscogenin, and neororuscogenin.28 The extract
of this plant is usually used at a concentration of 1 to 3%.29
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba L.)
Ginkgo biloba is a member of the Ginkgoaceae family.
The leaf extracts contain substances such as flavonoids
(eg, quercetin, campherol epicathecol derivatives),
biflavons (ginkgetin), and terpenes (ginkgolide B), among
others.24 Ginkgo biloba is used in the treatment of cellulite
owing to its numerous effects on peripheral circulation,
such as reducing blood viscosity. The terpenes, especially
ginkgolide B, inhibit the platelet-activating factor.24 They
increment red globule deformability, diminish vascular
permeability, and improve vascular wall tonus. All of these
actions produce improved microcirculation.
Ginkgo biloba also has flavonoids, which act as antiox-
idant and anti-inflammatory agents.24 In topical formula-
tions, the glycolic extract is used in a concentration of 5 to
10% and the dried extract in 0.2 to 2% concentration.
The irritant chemical constituent is ginkgolic acid.23 There
are some reports in the literature of cases of hypersensi-
tivity to ginkgo contained in anticellulite products.22 The
recommended concentration is 1 to 3%.
Chofitol or Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)
This is a member of the Arteraceae family, and it is found
in rich soils in the northern Mediterranean. The parts of
the plant used to produce the extract are the leaves, flower
heads, and roots.24 Its principal active chemical con-
stituents are numerous enzymes, cynarin, ascorbic acid,
caffeoylquinic acid derivatives, and flavonoids.24 It has an
antiedema and diuretic effect, as well as a stimulating
effect on the circulation.24
Common Ivy (Hedera helix) and Ground Ivy
(Glechoma hederaceae L.)
Common ivy is a phytomedicine that grows in places with
rich soil, sun, or shade. It originally came from Europe and
was later introduced into North America.
The parts of the plant used are dried leaves and stems.
The leaves have flavonoids, such as rutosid and rutinosid,
and saponins, such as hederin, hederacosid, and hedera-
genin.24,30
The fruits have saponins, especially hederin, and the
trunk has gomoresins and saponins. All saponins improve
venous and lymphatic drainage and reduce edema. One of
these compounds, hederin, also has an analgesic and anti-
inflammatory effect. It has vasoconstrictor and antiexuda-
tive proprieties and can also reduce capillary permeability.
It activates the circulation and so assists drainage of the
infiltrated tissue and reduces inflammation. On the other
hand, there are reports of allergic reactions, more than 65
cases, in patients who used topical products containing
ivy.22 The leaves of this plant are considered poisonous
when ingested23 because they contain arsenic oxide.
Ground ivy is from the Lamiaceae family and is also
used in anticellulite treatment. The main constituents are
flavonoids, triterpenoids, and phenolic acids. It grows in
moist soil in Europe, especially the Caucasus, and in North
America.24
Both types are used in concentrations of 2%.
Indian or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)
This plant belongs to the Hippocastanaceae family. The
seeds and the shells are used in the elaboration of the stan-
dard extract.31 The active ingredients contained in the
seeds are triterpenoid saponins, such as aescin and aes-
culin, and flavones, coumarins, and tannins,31 with anti-
inflammatory and antiedema properties.32 Escin is the
principal component of horse chestnut, and it has the
capacity to reduce lysosomatic enzyme activity by up to
30%, probably by stabilizing the cholesterol content of
the lysosome membranes, thus reducing enzyme release
and capillary permeability.33 Hypersensitivity has been
reported in users of products containing this ingredient.34
The recommended concentration is 1 to 3%.
Sweet Clover (Melilotus officinalis)
This is a plant from the Fabaceae family. The active ingre-
dient is contained in the flowers and leaves. One of the
components of this botanical extract is coumarin, which
reduces lymphatic edema and diminishes capillary perme-
ability.35 It is usually recommended to patients with
chronic venous insufficiency and lymphatic congestion,
condtions that are believed to be associated with cellulite.
The recommended concentration is 2 to 5%.35
Centella Asiatica, Asiatic Hydrocotyle, Gotu Kola
(Hydrocotyle asiatica)
Centella asiatica is a member of the Apiaceae family. The
parts of the plant used are leaves and roots.24 The princi-
pal active compounds are asiaticoside, madecassic acid,
and Asiatic acid. Asiaticoside is a potent healing agent that
is the most widely known property of this plant. Made-
cassic acid has an anti-inflammatory effect36,37 and is used
at concentrations of 2 to 5%.
Centella asiatica is also used in oral therapy and
mesotherapy.
Red Grapes (Vitis vinifera)
Red grapes are very rich in tannins, which are antioxi-
dants that diminish lipid peroxidation. They have pro-
Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE 869

870
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE
Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
cianidins, which increase the permeability of lymphatic
and microarterial vessels.35 In topical products, the essen-
tial oil is used at a concentration of 2 to 7%.35
There are some reports of dermatitis on the hands result-
ing from squeezing the fruit to obtain juice, which contains
several acids, such as oxalic, malic, tartaric, and racemic.23
Corynanth yohimbe, Pausinystalia yohimbe, and
Rauwolfia serpentina
Yohimbe and alpha-yohimbine are alkaloid derivatives
extracted from the leaves, shell, and roots of Rubiaceas
and Apocynaceas.24 They are sympatholytic drugs, adren-
ergic blockers capable of stimulating the burning of fat
owing to the presence of alkaloids that act directly on the
fat cells, stimulating their metabolism.24,38
Papaya (Carica papaya) and Pineapple (Ananas
sativus, Ananas comosus)
The fruits and leaves of these plants have anti-
inflammatory and antiedema effects.33,39,40 They contain
proteolytic enzymes, papain and bromelain, respectively.
These plants are originally from tropical America and
were introduced in southern Florida. The recommended
concentration is 2 to 5%.
Dermatitis and eczema are rare conditions. They may
be associated with the so-called “pineapple itch,” which is
due to a mite that infests pineapple plantations.22
Quality from Botanical Raw Material
Plant Standardization
The inclusion of botanicals in the treatment of cellulite
and other conditions requires parameters of standardiza-
tion. This represents a challenge because plants possess
several and at times dozens of chemical substances mixed
together. Such parameters principally involve criteria for
the choice of the species used and the tracing of phyto-
chemical variations during the process of the extraction of
the active ingredients.
The initial process of standardization requires the col-
lection of material from populations of plants of various
origins, the registration and determination of the phyto-
chemical profile, comparison with the desired standard,
and evaluation of the plant’s potential as a production
source.41 When the phytochemical study of a plant is
incomplete, as is the case with many plants from Brazil,
there is a need to isolate and describe new molecules in
order that the phytochemical profile of the species can be
established and serve as a standard (Figure 3).
Quality Control
The quality control of botanicals can be described in the
following steps24,41:
• Control of sources (original plants). The botanical clas-
sification of the original plant is established, and a spe-
cialist provides a certificate. A phytochemical descrip-
tion based on the genetic load of the plant should be
performed.
• Control of planting. At this stage, it is necessary to
define the parameters for cultivation, such as climate,
altitude, soil composition, and competition with other
species (see Figure 1).
• Control of botanical raw material. The medicinal plant,
once harvested, is called botanical raw material. The
control of botanical raw material consists of some of
the aspects listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Principal Aspects of the Control of Botanical Raw Material
Plant identification
Physical tests (organoleptic): comparison of the appearance, color, odor, taste of the botanical
with a known reference standard, loss on drying, ash content, and microscopy
Chemical tests include tests for solubility, thin-layer chromatography, etc.
Selection of the extraction 
Maceration, percolation, distillation, supercritical fluid extraction, countercurrent extraction,
method
lipid extraction, etc.
The proper method selection is essential to preserve the inherent property
Morphologic analysis
Carried out using a microscope or magnifying glass
Identify the species and the foreign elements or contaminants present
Bacteriologic analysis
Inoculation in culture medium
Identify contamination by bacteria with pathogenic potential in humans, such as Salmonella
and Shigella, respecting internationally established limits for the quantity of contaminants in
a batch
Chemical analysis
Gas chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography, thin-layer chromatography,
and spectrophotometric techniques, such as ultraviolet and infrared
Verify organic and inorganic, molecular and elemental, qualitative and quantitative chemical
botanical aspects of composition and verify the composition and presence of herbicides or
chemical additives
Clinical and toxicologic controls
Same as those applied rigorously for other pharmaceutical products and that determine the
validity and stability of the formulations

Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE 871
Conclusion
The therapeutic value of medicinal plants is currently
being researched and recognized in the scientific commu-
nity, and their medical use is increasing. Despite the exis-
tence of a great number of anticellulite products, the
reduction of fat deposits achieved through the continuous
use of these products depends on a number of factors.
Among them are the availability of the active ingredient at
the action sites, the concentration of the ingredient in the
formulation, and the physicochemical characteristics par-
ticular to each active ingredient. Moreover, the influence
of other factors that affect cellulite, such as diet, physical
exercise, and weight loss, hampers the evaluation of the
response to treatment. Paradoxically, there is an indirect
relationship between the range of products and active
ingredients available and studies in the literature that ver-
ify their safety and efficiency in the battle against cellulite.
New scientific research is necessary to verify the use of
such substances.
The inclusion of botanical extracts in topical products
has become necessary owing to present-day chemical
knowledge, safety, and improvements. Although they may
be recognized as medicine and produce expected results in
the treatment of cellulite, it is necessary to be cautious
with regard to the origin of these products and verify
whether the raw materials are classified as standardized
extracts. The standardized extracts are efficacious because
they have a higher proportion of the active ingredients.
Such standardization permits each phytomedicine to have
the same effect anywhere in the world.
References
1. Goldman MP. Cellulite: a review of current treatments. Cosmet Der-
matol 2002;15:17–20.
2. Buscaglia DA, Conte ET. The treatment of cellulite with methylxan-
thine and herbal extract based cream: an ultrasonographic analysis.
Cosmet Dermatol 1996;9:30–40
3. Lesser T, Ritvo E, Moy LS. Modification of subcutaneous adipose tis-
sue by a methylxanthine formulation: a double-blind controlled
study. Dermatol Surg 1999;25:445–62.
4. Baltassat F, Darbour N, Ferry S. Etude du contenu de drogues à caffeine.
II: le guarana, Paullinia Cupana Mart. Plant Med Phytoth
1985;19:68–74.
5. Di Salvo RM. Controlling the appearance of cellulite: surveying the
cellulite reduction effectiveness of xanthines, silanes, Coa, 1-car-
nitina and herbal extracts. Cosmet Toilet 1995;110:50–9.
6. Bacci PA, Leibaschoff G. La celulitis. Medical Book; 2000. p. 24–58.
7. Hexsel D, Mazzuco R. Subcision: uma alternativa cirúrgica para a
lipodistrofia ginóide (“celulite”) e outras alterações do relevo corpo-
ral. An Bras Dermatol 1997;72:27–32.
8. Draelos ZD, Marenus KD. Cellulite: etiology and purported treat-
ment. Dermatol Surg 1997;23:1177–81.
9. Viglioglia R y. Cosmiatría II. Buenos Aires: AP Americana de Publi-
caciones; 1989..
10. Curri SB. Cellulite and fatty tissue microcirculation. Cosmet Toilet
1993;108:51–8.
11. Giudicelli Y. Physiologie du tissu adipeux. Cosmétologie 1995;5:46–9.
12. Marty JP, Wepierre K. Percutaneous absorption of cosmetics: impli-
cations in safety and efficacy. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, editors. Cos-
metic dermatology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1994. p. 61–76.
13. Seiler M, Orecchioni AM, Vaution C. Vesicular systems and multiple
emulsions in cosmetology. In: Baran R, Maibach HI, editors. Cos-
metic dermatology. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1994. p. 27–35.
14. Harding CR. The stratum corneum: structure and function in health
and disease. Dermatol Ther 2004;17:6–15.
15. Medeiros LB. Lipogistrofia ginóide: tratamento clínico. In: Kede MP,
Sabatovich O, editors. Dermatologia estética. Rio de Janeiro:
Atheneu; 2003. p. 344–8.
16. Bertin C, Zunino H, Pittet JC, et al. A double-blind evaluation of the
activity of an anti-cellulite product containing retinol, caffeine, and
ruscogenine by a combination of several non-invasive methods. J
Cosmet Sci 2001:52:199–210.
17. Dias M, Farinha A, Faustino E, et al. Topical delivery of caffeine
from some commercial formulations.  Int J Pharm 1999;182:41–7.
18. Portad G, Laugel C, Baillet A, et al. Quantitative HPLC analysis of
sunscreens and caffeine during in vitro percutaneous penetration
studies. Int J Pharm 1999;189:249–60.
19. Sepúlveda P. Comparative developing and evaluation of two cos-
metic products to treat lipodystrophy. Memory to obtain the phar-
macist title. Santiago (Chile): Universidad de Chile; 2001.
20. Cellulite. Le Quotidien de Médecin, Paris, September 1989.
21. Cosmetique et adipocytes. Monaco: Laboratoire EXSYMOL S.A.M. ;
1995.
22. Sainio EL, Jolanki R, Hakala E, Kanerva L. Ingredients and safety of
cellulite creams. Eur J Dermatol 2000;10:596–603.
23. Behl PN, Capitanin RM, Bedi BMS, Gupta S. Skin irritant sensitiz-
ing plants found in India. New Delhi: P. N. Behl; 1966.
24. Amelio FS. Botanicals: a phytocosmetic desk reference. Boca Raton
(FL): CRC Press; 1999.
25. Fujimura T, Tsukahara K, Moriwaki S, et al. Treatment of human
skin with an extract of Fucus vesiculosus changes its thickness and
mechanical properties. J Cosmet Sci 2002;53:1–9.
26. Fugimura T, Tsukahara K, Moriwaki S, et al. Effects of natural prod-
uct extracts on contraction and mechanical properties of fibroblast
populated collagen gel. Biol Pharm Bull 2000;23:291–7.
27. Rubanyi G, Marcelon G, Vanhoutte PM. Effect of temperature on
the responsiveness of cutaneous elicited by Ruscus aculeatus. Gen
Pharmacol 1984;15:431–4.
28. Evans WC. Trease and Evans’ pharmacognosy. 13th ed. London: Bal-
lière Tindall; 1989.
Figure 3. Area dedicated to the cultivation of medicinal plants in
the Botanical Gardens in Rio de Janeiro.

872
HEXSEL ET AL: BOTANICAL EXTRACTS FOR TREATMENT OF CELLULITE
Dermatol Surg
31:7 Part 2:July 2005
29. Berg D. [Venous constriction by local administration of ruscus
extract]. Fortschr Med 1990;108:473–6.
30. Facino RM, Carini M, Stefani R, et al. Anti-elastase and anti-
hyaluronidase activities of saponins and sapogenins from Hedera
helix, Aesculus hippocastanum, and Ruscus aculeatus: factors con-
tributing to their efficacy in the treatment of venous insufficiency. Arch
Pharm (Weinheim) 1995;328:720–4.
31. Fluck H. Medicinal plants. New York: W. Foulsham & Co; 1988.
32. Weiss RF. Herbal medicine. [Translated by Lehrbuch der Phytother-
apie by A.R. Meuss, 6th German ed.] London: The Bath Press; 1986.
33. Dweck A. The natural solutions to cellulite. Scapperfumery and cos-
metics. October (1995) 68, 10, 45–49. Available at: http://
www.dweckdata.co.uk (accessed March 2004).
34. Comaish JS, Kersey PJ. Contact dermatitis to extract of horse chest-
nut (esculin). Contact Dermatitis 1980;6:150–1.
35. Croda, Croda International Ilc, Yorkshire (UK), 2002.
36. Izu R, Aguirre A, Gil N, et al. Allergic contact dermatitis from a cream
containing Centella asiatica extract. Contact Dermatitis 1992;26:192–3.
37. Danese P, Carnevali C, Bertazzoni MG. Allergic contact dermatitis
due to Centella asiatica extract. Contact Dermatitis 1994;31:201.
38. Bucci LR. Selected herbals and human exercise performance. Am J
Clin Nutr 2000;72(2 Suppl):624S–36S.
39. Carle R. Anti-inflammatory and spasmolytic botanical drugs. Br J
Phytother 1990;1:32–9.
40. Pineapple. In: The Lawrence review of natural products - monograph
system. Facts and Comparisons. St. Louis (MO): Wolters Kluwer;
2001.
41. Silva JM. Qualidade em medicamentos fitoterápicos. Flora medici-
nal. Available at: www.floramedicinal.com.br. Accessed March 13,
2004.
Commentary
Cellulite is a condition that afflicts most postpubertal women in
the United States. Any finding that is this common in a popula-
tion certainly cannot be considered an abnormality or disease.
Cellulite is simply part of being female. Yet this is not reassuring
to patients. They want the cellulite gone!
It is truly amazing that something as ubiquitous as cellulite is
so poorly understood. Several theories have been advanced to
explain its presence. The theories fall under several categories:
vascular, structural, and inflammatory.
Some investigators have postulated that cellulite is a degrada-
tion process initiated by deterioration of the dermal vasculature,
particularly loss of the capillary networks. As a result, excess fluid
is retained with the dermal and subcutaneous tissues. This loss of
the capillary network is thought to be due to engorged fat cells
clumping together and inhibiting venous return. After the capillary
networks have been damaged, vascular changes begin to occur
within the dermis, resulting in decreased protein synthesis and an
inability to repair tissue damage. Clumps of protein are deposited
around the fatty deposits beneath the skin, causing hard nodules
composed of fat surrounded by hard reticular protein. Ultrasound
imaging of skin affected by cellulite at this stage reveals thinning
of the dermis with subcutaneous fat pushing upward, which trans-
lates into the rumpled skin known as cellulite.
Other investigators have observed that cellulite is more com-
mon in overweight and obese women. This is felt to be due to the
presence of copious fat lobules within the subcutaneous tissue
encased in fibrous septae with dermal attachments. These fibrous
attachments surrounding abundant fat lead to the rumpled
appearance of the skin characteristic of cellulite.
I happen to favor the inflammatory theory of cellulite. This
theory maintains that cellulite is an inflammatory process result-
ing from breakdown of the collagen in the dermis, providing for
the subcutaneous fat herniations seen on ultrasonography. The
onset of cellulite with puberty and menstruation has caused some
researchers to evaluate the hormonal changes necessary for
sloughing of the endometrium. It appears that menstruation
requires the secretion of metalloproteases (MMPs), such as col-
lagenase (collagenase 1, MMP-1) and gelatinase (gelatinase A,
MMP-2). The endometrial glandular and stromal cells secrete
these enzymes to allow menstrual bleeding to occur. Collage-
nases cleave the triple helical domain of fibrillar collagens at a
neutral pH and are secreted just prior to menstruation. However,
the collagenase may break down the fibrillar collagens present
not only in the endometrium but also in the dermis. With
repeated cyclical collagenase production, more and more dermal
collagen is destroyed, accounting for the worsening of cellulite
seen with age. Eventually, enough collagen is destroyed to
weaken the reticular and papillary dermis and allow subcuta-
neous fat to herniate between the structural fibrous septa found
in female fat.
This article presented by Hexsel and coauthors describes
some of the botanical agents in the cosmeceutical market to treat
this condition known as cellulite. Botanicals can be safely used,
but can they actually affect cellulite? Perhaps from a cosmetic
aspect, they may provide improvement, but the elimination of
cellulite at present remains a technical impossibility.
ZOE DIANA DRAELOS, MD
High Point, NC
