DePaul University
Via Sapientiae
Grace Peterson Nursing Research Colloquium
2017
Nov 17th, 10:00 AM - 11:30 AM
High Antioxidant Diet and its Effect on Delaying
Alzheimer’s: An Integrative Literature Review
Alyssa Beyer
beyer014@rangers.uwp.edu
Follow this and additional works at: http://via.library.depaul.edu/nursing-colloquium
Part of the Nursing Commons
This Event is brought to you for free and open access by Via Sapientiae. It has been accepted for inclusion in Grace Peterson Nursing Research
Colloquium by an authorized administrator of Via Sapientiae. For more information, please contact mbernal2@depaul.edu, wsulliv6@depaul.edu,
c.mcclure@depaul.edu.
Beyer, Alyssa, "High Antioxidant Diet and its Effect on Delaying Alzheimer’s: An Integrative Literature Review" (2017). Grace Peterson
Nursing Research Colloquium. 69.
http://via.library.depaul.edu/nursing-colloquium/2017/Fall_2017/69

Running Head: HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High Antioxidant Diet and its Effect on Delaying Alzheimer’s: 
An Integrative Literature Review 
Alyssa Beyer  
Alison DiValerio 
DePaul University  
School of Nursing 
Fall 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurological disease that is characterized by 
cognitive deficits and intellectual loss (Oberg & Mischley, 2008). With Alzheimer’s so prevalent 
in society and no effective treatments, it is essential to find preventative strategies when 
approaching the disease. A diet high in antioxidants may prove as an effective means in 
delaying, if not preventing, the onset of AD (Polidori & Schulz, 2013). In the absence of 
adequate antioxidant defense system, oxidative-stress related changes occur in the brain. This 
leads to cognitive impairment and AD-related alterations and symptoms (Polidori & Schulz, 
2013). This very reason is why patient education and the importance of a high antioxidant diet is 
so critical.  
Objectives: The goal of this systematic integrated literature review is to determine whether there 
is a direct correlation between intake of a high antioxidant diet and delayed symptoms of 
Alzheimer’s disease.  
Methods: A systematic integrated literature review search was conducted within the databases 
CINAHL Complete, Consumer Health Complete-EBSCOhost, Health Source: 
Nursing/Academic Edition, and PsychINFO. 225 results were yielded through this search. 
Results: A synthesis across studies in relation to a high antioxidant diet and prevention of 
Alzheimer’s was analyzed. A consensus points to antioxidant therapy alone not being sufficient 
enough to prevent, or delay, AD. Statistical outcomes, in all of the studies analyzed, show 
antioxidants having no effect on cognitive improvement. 
Conclusions: A balanced diet, such as the Mediterranean diet, and a healthy lifestyle including 
physical activity is the best option in preventing the onset of dementia. 
Key Words: Alzheimer’s, antioxidant, diet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
Background and Significance 
 
Alzheimer’s, a progressive disease, accounting for nearly 60 to 80% of those diagnosed 
with some form of dementia (Alzheimer’s Association, 2017). Visioli and Burgos-Ramos (2016) 
define Alzheimer’s disease (AD) as an irreversible neurodegenerative disorder that results in 
cognitive decline and progressive memory loss. Intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein and extracellular senile plaques containing amyloid β peptides 
(Aβ) are both characteristic features of AD. It is estimated that nearly 35.6 million people were 
living with Alzheimer’s in the year 2010 and the number is expected to triple by 2050 (Caldwell, 
Yao, & Diaz Brinton, 2014). Since presently AD has no defined cure, it is essential to find 
alternative methods to delay the progression of, and even prevent, the disease from occurring.  
 
Presently the healthcare organizations do not currently offer any feasible pharmacological 
methods to treat dementia and cognitive decline (Visioli & Burgos-Ramos, 2016). Presently 
research is being conducted on antioxidant therapies and the relatively low risk they provide in 
targeting early cognitive and biological changes in the body. Antioxidants fight oxidative 
damage that is caused by free radicals that build up in the nerve cells (National Institute on 
Aging, 2016). Free radicals have “taken the role of the main villain in AD pathogenesis and/or 
progression (Behl 1999; Behl and Moosman 2002 as cited by Souza Ferreirs, Soares de 
Vasconcelos, Da Costa, Leite da Silva, Da Silva Barbosa, Quadros Gomes…Percario, 2015). 
Literature supports that an antioxidant diet would be used as an alternative method to 
prevent the buildup of free radicals. Antioxidant therapy could be promoted through diet with 
foods such as cranberries, blackberries, pears, apricots, artichokes, bell peppers, legumes, 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
4 
 
walnuts, pomegranate juice, and various others. It is recommended that not just one food group 
be the sole source of an antioxidant (Mayo Clinic Staff, 2014).  
Problem Statement  
 
Alzheimer’s is a progressive disease that presently has no cure and is the sixth leading 
cause of death in the United States with those diagnosed only living an average of eight years 
after noticeable symptoms (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2015). When the 
onset of Alzheimer’s occurs memory loss is mild and the individual realizes such and attempts to 
cover up clues of such happening. As the disease progresses this becomes more difficult since 
activities of daily life are effected.  Early stages of memory loss are mild and as the disease 
progresses the individual declines and loss of performing daily activities of life become more 
difficult to where the ability to carry on a conversation and respond to one’s environment is 
totally impaired. (Alzheimer’s Association, 2017).  
While there are pharmacologic treatments, studies suggest that antioxidants protect the 
brain from cognitive decline as well (National Institute on Aging, 2016). With Alzheimer’s so 
prevalent in society, it is essential to determine whether a diet high in antioxidants prevents the 
onset of Alzheimer’s. With the baby boomer generation aging, it is projected that by the year 
2050, 7.1 million people 65 years of age and older are predicted to have AD. This is a 40% 
increase from today. (Seegert. 2014).  With such a drastic increase in the disease, it’s safe to 
argue that there may be a deficit in the number of medical staff needed to address AD.  
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
5 
 
Purpose of Integrative Literature Review 
 
The purpose of the integrative literature review is to determine whether a high 
antioxidant diet is effective in delaying the onset of Alzheimer disease.  Research that examined 
the efficacy of macronutrients and how they relate to the prevention of cognitive deficit will be 
evaluated. In addition, research that take gender into consideration will be analyzed. Women, not 
only represent two-thirds of the population with Alzheimer’s disease, but they are also more 
likely to be diagnosed (Rubin, 2015). Review of literature will determine whether a diet high in 
antioxidants is more effective for women compared to men and vice versa. Lastly, this review 
will determine if there are additional non-pharmaceutical interventional that have proven 
effective in the preventing the onset of Alzheimer’s. Information obtained from this integrative 
literature review should provide healthcare professionals with the opportunity to provide families 
with the necessary information that will help delay, if not prevent, Alzheimer’s.  
Research Questions 
1. When is the best time to start antioxidant therapy? 
 
2. Should there be more of a focus on diet as a whole, rather than single components of a 
diet? 
 
3. What other non-pharmaceutical interventions have proven effective in preventing onset 
of Alzheimer’s? 
Conceptual Framework 
 
Prevention, or a delay, in the onset of Alzheimer’s could be associated to a high 
antioxidant diet. The Health-Promoting Self-Care System Model (HPSCSM) is a model used to 
explain an individual’s motivation behind taking part in health-promoting behaviors. According 
to HPSCSM “individuals are capable of developing the knowledge, attitudes, and skills 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
6 
 
necessary for deciding upon and performing health-promoting behaviors…” (Simmons, 1990 as 
cited by Raingruber, 2014). Due to the high value of self-care when promoting health to 
individuals, it is the nurse’s responsibility to collectively provide education in promoting self-
care behaviors. In addition, nursing influences conditioning factors such as social, 
environmental, perceived health state, and healthcare experiences.  
Figure 1: Self Care and Health Promoting Behaviors  
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
7 
 
Methods 
Research Design 
The design of the study presented here is an integrative literature review aimed to 
discover whether there is a direct correlation between a high antioxidant diet and prevention of 
Alzheimer’s. In order to complete the integrative literature review, the researcher will search the 
literature to find articles that pertain to diets high in antioxidants and rates of delay and 
prevention. The integrative literature review will be conducted using the framework of the 
Health-Promoting Self-Care System Model (HPSCSM). The framework will help establish an 
individual’s self-care behaviors, specifically diet, and whether these behaviors have influenced 
prevention of Alzheimer’s.  
Literature Search Strategies 
 
The DePaul University library search engine was utilized for the integrative literature 
review in order to gain access to a variety of databases.  A review of the following databases was 
searched:  CINAHL Complete, Consumer Health Complete-EBSCOhost, Health Source: 
Nursing/Academic Edition, and PsychINFO. The keywords that were used to search the 
databases were “Alzheimer’s”, “antioxidant”, and “diet” which yielded 225 results. 
Literature Search Limitation and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
The search for the integrative literature review was limited to articles that only addressed 
diet and nutritional supplementation. Additionally, articles that were published between the years 
2003-2016 were assessed. Studies that were not peer-reviewed were excluded from the review. 
Studies that did not focus on human populations were eliminated with the exception of animal 
studies that provided a direct correlation between diet and prevention of AD.  

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
8 
 
Table 1: Diagram of Review Process 
 
 
 
 
CINAHL 
EBSCOhost 
   Health Source 
PsychINFO 
 
Number of  
studies found 
using keywords: 
 
97 
 
19 
 
   17 
 
 
92 
 
Number of studies 
that met inclusion  
criteria: 
 
 
36 
 
16 
 
   6  
 
 
31 
 
 
Number of studies 
selected based on  
total content:  
 
3 
 
1 
 
   1 
 
 
4 
 
Number of studies  
after duplicates  
were excluded:  
 
0 
 
2 
 
   3 
 
 
5 
 
Total number  
of articles used: (9) 
 
Data Analysis 
 
The studies that will be classified in a table under the following categories: author and 
year; purpose/problem; sample; framework; design; any additional measures that may play a role 
in preventing AD; and results. The following table will be used in order to compare and contrast 
each study and determine if a high antioxidant diet is effective in preventing onset of 
Alzheimer’s. Studies presented in the literature review will explore which interventions were 
successful and unsuccessful in preventing onset of Alzheimer’s. 
Results 
 
A synthesis across studies in relation to a high antioxidant diet and prevention of 
Alzheimer’s was analyzed. The following chart matrix will be used to analyze the studies that 
will be used in the systematic literature review. A consensus points to antioxidant therapy alone 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
9 
 
not being sufficient enough to prevent, or delay, AD. Statistical outcomes, in all of the studies 
analyzed, show antioxidants having no effect on cognitive improvement. While this is true, it is 
important to determine the best window to implement preventative strategies for AD. The 
prodromal/preclinical window is the area that should be focused on (Caldwell, Yao, & Diaz 
Brinton, 2015). This window of opportunity can take place anywhere from 20 to 30 years before 
an individual develops AD (Kamphuis & Scheltens, 2010).  
Discussion 
Relevant Findings 
 
Ancelin, Christen and Ritchie (2007) found that that the consumption of antioxidants is 
more likely to be preventative rather than curative when it comes to mild cognitive impairment. 
This finding points to antioxidants having more of an impact on mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) rather than dementia. Additionally, a combination of substances could potentially provide 
a benefit towards targeting dementia and Alzheimer’s. “Combination of vitamins, minerals and 
herbal antioxidants could offer greater potential benefit than any single antioxidant, especially if 
the agents work in different cellular compartments or have complementary mechanisms of 
action” (Ancelin, Christen, & Ritchie, 2007, p. 13). While this may be true, it is unclear as to 
which proportion and doses should be used for each substance to be beneficial. This is an area 
that would require further research.  
 
Polidori and Schulz expressed similar findings in their review. Antioxidants alone are not 
sufficient enough to delay the onset of Alzheimer’s. Rather, a combination of a healthy lifestyle 
and balanced diet, including antioxidants, is the method that should be used to target and delay 
the onset of AD. The Mediterranean diet is a prime example of a balanced diet that has scientific 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
10 
 
evidenced for being protective against the onset of dementia. “The Mediterranean diet is a diet 
characterized by high intake of fish, vegetables, legumes, fruits, cereals, unsaturated fatty acids 
mostly in the form of olive oil, low intake of dairy products, meat and saturated fatty acids as 
well as regular but moderate intake of alcohol” (Polidori and Schulz, 2014, p. 382). Specifically, 
the fruits and vegetables are a high source of antioxidants micronutrients and synergism of these 
food groups’ contents. It would be safe to assume then that this diet, paired with a healthy 
lifestyle, would be a suitable choice for those that have risk factors for AD.  
 
Kamphuis and Scheltens (2010) concluded that a single nutrient is insufficient in 
providing protection against the onset of dementia. Instead, a multi-nutritional intervention is 
needed in order to target multiple disease aspects such as inflammation, oxidative stress, Aβ, 
synaptic loss, and the vascular system (Kamphuis and Scheltens, 2010). Additionally, timing the 
nutritional intervention is key to increase potential benefits. “Pathological changes in the brains 
of persons at risk for developing AD can develop as early as 20 to 30 years prior to clinical 
dementia symptoms (Kamphuis and Scheltens, 2010, p. 772). With this in mind, the earlier the 
supplementation is started, the better.  
 
Otaegui-Arrazola et al. (2014) determined through review that “epidemiological cross-
sectional and longitudinal studies in humans shows a protective role of dietary and supplemented 
intake of n-3 PUFAs and fish against AD and cognitive aging. On the other hand, no such effect 
has been consistently observed for antioxidants and B vitamin intake either from diet or 
supplements” (pg. 17). This review also concluded that timing for treatment and supplementation 
for AD as there is evidence that the disease can begin anywhere from 10-15 years before clinical 
symptoms appear (Otaegui-Arrazola et al., 2014). Otaegui-Arrazola et al. (2014) explain that 
future studies should focus on younger populations to target this time frame.  

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
11 
 
 
Souza Ferreira et al. (2015) didn’t come up with any conclusive evidence in regards to 
antioxidants having an effect on the onset of AD symptoms. More studies are needed in order to 
determine whether using antioxidants can either reduce the risk or slow the progression of AD. 
For the meantime, antioxidant therapy is still considered a low-risk therapeutic strategy if using 
multiple antioxidants. Souza Ferreira et al. (2015) state “the use of a single antioxidant for long 
periods can be harmful because the molecule may be oxidized and become a pro-oxidative 
substance” (p.606). When using multiple antioxidants, the potential for toxicity is decreased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
12 
 
 

Running Head: HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
15 
 
Source/Year 
Purpose/ 
Problem 
Sample 
Framework 
Design 
Additional  
Measures 
Results 
Ancelin, M. 
L., Christen, 
Y., & 
Ritchie, K., 
(2007) 
“Therapeutic 
interventions for 
the prodromal 
stages of dementia 
are currently 
being sought with 
a view to delaying 
if not preventing 
disease onset” 
(pg. 1).  
769 patients 
with MCI; 
1,059 
elderly; 117 
elderly; 
3,385 men; 
14, 968 
women; 894 
≥ 65 years… 
None 
Review article looking 
at clinical trials; several 
epidemiological reviews  
Smoking is 
associated with a 
poor diet and increase 
in the load of free 
radicals. Smoking 
cessation is highly 
recommended.  
It is suggested that 
the consumption of 
antioxidants is 
more likely to be 
preventative rather 
than curative when 
it comes to mild 
cognitive 
impairment. Table 
2b in this review 
article shows the 
association between 
vitamin intake in 
the diet and positive 
effect on cognition. 
In regards to 
vitamin C 
consumption, 4 
studies showed a 
positive effect on 
cognition, 4 studies 
showed a negative 
effect and 2 studies 
showed no 
difference. In 
regards to β-
carotene 
consumption, 2 
studies showed a 
positive effect on 
cognition, 3 studies 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
14 
 
showed a negative 
effect and 5 studies 
showed no 
difference. Lastly, 
vitamin E 
consumption was 
assessed. 4 studies 
showed a positive 
effect on cognition, 
4 studies showed a 
negative effect and 
2 studies showed no 
difference.  
Kamphuis, 
P. J. G. H., 
Scheltens, 
P., (2010) 
“Specific nutrient 
deficiencies in the 
elderly, including 
omega- 3 fatty 
acids, B-vitamins, 
and antioxidants 
among others, 
may exacerbate 
pathological 
processes in the 
brain” (pg, 765).  
220 healthy, 
free-living 
women; 6377 
women; 818 
healthy men 
and women; 
910 healthy 
men and 
women 
… 
None 
Review article looking 
at several 
epidemiological reviews 
Diet as a whole, 
instead of looking at 
a single component, 
is gaining more 
recognition (i.e. 
Mediterranean-style 
diet).  
“Current 
understanding 
suggests that multi- 
nutritional (rather 
than single nutrient) 
intervention, 
targeting multiple 
disease aspects… 
may have the 
greatest therapeutic 
potential” (pg. 
772). Of the 9 
completed studies 
that examined the 
prevention of 
cognitive decline, 
only 3 showed 
signs of positive 
effects on 
cognition.  

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
15 
 
Otaegui-
Arrazola. A., 
Amiano, P., 
Elbusto, A., 
Urdaneta, E. 
& Martínez-
Lage, P., 
(2014) 
The effect of diet 
and nutritional 
factors on the risk 
of AD and 
cognitive aging.  
1416 ≥65 
years; 815 
(65-94) 
years; 2233 
≥65 years; 
8085 ≥65 
years; 5395 
≥55 years 
… 
None 
Review article looking 
at longitudinal 
observational studies 
and clinical trials 
PUFAs 
(polyunsaturated fatty 
acids) have been 
found to reduce the 
risk of AD and MCI. 
“The available 
evidence from 
epidemiological 
cross-sectional and 
longitudinal studies 
in humans shows a 
protective role of 
dietary and 
supplemented 
intake of n-3 
PUFAs and fish 
against AD and 
cognitive aging. On 
the other hand, no 
such effect has been 
consistently 
observed for 
antioxidants and B 
vitamin intake 
either from diet or 
supplements” (pg. 
17).  
Polidori, M. 
C., & 
Schulz, R. J., 
(2014) 
“This review 
summarizes 
knowledge about 
the impact of 
nutrition as part of 
a healthy lifestyle 
and of micronut- 
rients in particular 
on delaying and 
avoiding dementia 
onset” (pg. 381). 
341 patients 
with AD; 
769 patients 
with MCI; 20 
patients with 
AD; 100 
patients with 
AD 
None 
Review article looking 
at clinical trials 
A balanced diet, such 
as the Mediterranean, 
has gained the 
highest scientific 
evidence for the 
protection against 
dementia onset. A 
balanced diet, 
together with social 
activities, physical 
exercise, and 
A balanced diet and 
healthy lifestyle, 
rather than 
antioxidants alone, 
are more effective 
in delaying the 
onset of AD.  

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
16 
 
cognitive engagement 
has proven most 
effective.  
Souza 
Ferreira, M. 
E., Soares de 
Vasconcelos, 
A., Da Costa 
Vilhena, T., 
Leite da 
Silva, T., Da  
Silva 
Barbosa, A., 
Quadros 
Gomes, A. 
R., Fani 
Dolabela, M. 
& Percario, 
S., (2015)  
 
The risk of AD is 
growing. It’s 
important to 
understand the 
underlying 
process as well as 
the grounds for 
antioxidant 
therapy.  
Wasn’t 
specifically  
stated in the 
review 
None 
Review article looking 
at experimental studies 
No other additional 
measures were 
mentioned other than 
the need to further 
research antioxidant 
therapy.  
More studies are 
needed in order to 
determine whether 
using antioxidants 
can either reduce 
the risk or slow the 
progression of AD. 

Running Head: HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
15 
 
Conclusion 
 
A consensus points to antioxidant therapy alone not being sufficient enough to prevent, or 
delay, AD. Instead, research suggests that diet as a whole, in conjunction with exercise, is 
something that should be addressed. A balanced diet, such as the Mediterranean diet, and a 
healthy lifestyle including physical activity is the best option in preventing the onset of dementia. 
According to Kamphuis and Scheltens (2010) importance for diet as a whole is reaching light in 
the AD community. “Adherence to a Mediterranean-style diet has been associated with a reduced 
risk for developing AD. Based on studies comparing single versus multiple nutrient 
supplementation, there is a need for multi-nutrient and, multi-target interventional AD 
management approached” (p. 770). 
Nursing Implications and Future Directions  
With the prevalence of AD being so high in the community, it is critical to find ways to 
hinder and, ideally, prevent the disease. As stated in the conclusion, antioxidant therapy alone is 
not sufficient enough to prevent or delay AD. Nurses should, instead, promote a healthy lifestyle 
including diet and exercise, provide patient and family education and be made available to 
answer any questions. It was noted among numerous articles used in the systematic literature 
review that more research should be conducted into the efficacy of antioxidant therapy. While 
it’s benefits have been proven in animal models, it has yet to be demonstrated in human models.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
18 
 
References 
Albarracin, S. L., Stab, B., Casas, Z., Sutachan, J. J., Samudio, I., Gonzalez, J., Gonzalo, L., 
 
Capani, F., Morales, L., & Barreto, G. E. (2012). Effects of natural antioxidants in 
 
neurodegenerative disease. Nutritional Neuroscience, 15(1), 1-9.  
Alzheimer’s Association (2017). What is Alzheimer’s Disease? Retrieved from http://www. 
 
alz.org/alzheimers_disease_what_is_alzheimers.asp  
 
Ancelin, M. L., Christen, Y., & Ritchie, K. (2007). Is antioxidant therapy a viable alternative 
 
for mild cognitive impairment? Examination of the evidence. Dementia and Geriatric 
 
Cognitive Disorders, 24, 1-19.  
Caldwell, C. C., Yao, J., & Diaz Brinton, R. (2015). Targeting the prodromal stage of  
 
 
Alzheimer’s disease: Bionenergetic and mitochnidrial opportunities. Neurotherapeutics,  
 
12, 66-80.  
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2015, May 5). Alzheimer’s Disease. Retrieved from 
 
https://www.cdc.gov/aging/aginginfo/alzheimers.htm 
Kamphuis, P. J. G. H., Scheltens, P. (2010). Can nutrients prevent or delay onset of Alzheimer’s 
 
disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 20, 765-775. 
Mayo Clinic Staff (2014, April 6). Slide show: Add Antioxidants to Your Diet. Retrieved from 
 
http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/multimedia/ 
 
antioxidants/sls-20076428 
Oberb, E. & Mischley, L. (2008). The prevention and delay of Alzheimer’s disease. Integrative 
 
Medicine, 7(3), 54-59. 
Otaegui-Arrazola. A., Amiano, P., Elbusto, A., Urdaneta, E. & Martínez-Lage, P. (2014). Diet,  
 
cognition, and Alzheimer’s disease: food for thought. European Journal of Nutrition, 53,  
 
1-23.  
National Institute on Aging (2016). Preventing Alzheimer’s Disease: What Do We Know?  
 
Retrieved from https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/preventing-alzheimers 
 
-disease/search-alzheimers-prevention-strategies 
Polidori, M. C., & Schulz, R. J. (2014). Nutritional contributions to dementia prevention: Main  

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
19 
 
 
issues on antioxidant micronutrients. Genes and Nutrition, 9(382), 1-11. 
Raingruber, B. (2014). Contemporary health promotion in nursing practice. New York, NY: 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC. 
Rubin, R. (2015). Why Women Get Alzheimer’s More Often Than Men. Retrieved from http:// 
 
www.nextavenue.org/why-women-get-alzheimers-more-often-than-men/ 
Seegert, L. (2014). Incidence of Alzheimer’s disease continues to rise as boomer’s age. 
 
Retrieved from http://healthjournalism.org/blog/2014/05/incidence-of-alzheimers- 
 
disease-continues-to-rise-as-boomers-age/ 
Souza Ferreira, M. E., Soares de Vasconcelos, A., Da Costa Vilhena, T., Leite da Silva, T., Da  
 
Silva Barbosa, A., Quadros Gomes, A. R., Fani Dolabela, M. & Percario, S. (2015).  
 
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease: Should we keep trying antioxidant therapies?  
 
Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, 35, 595-614.  
Visioli, F. & Burgos-Ramos, E. (2016). Selected macronutrients in cognitive decline prevention 
 
and therapy. Molecular Neurobiology, 53, 4083-4093.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HIGH ANTIOXIDANT DIET AND DELAYING ALZHEIMER’S 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
