Page | 1 
 
ENJOYING COFFEE WITH HISTAMINE 
INTOLERANCE OR MCAS 
 
Over the past two years Purity Coffee has received a growing number of messages from customers who 
have food sensitivities. They express how they need to limit the intake of various categories of foods or 
else suffer from painful reactions. Many of them are writing because they find Purity Coffees to be the 
only coffees they can consume without negative reactions. We are intrigued by this and seek to 
understand what might be happening. This short, simplified literature review looks at the current state of 
scientific research on coffee and histamine specifically, and more generally on compounds in coffee that 
may cause reactions in those with Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS). 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: 
WHAT IS HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE?  
Histamine intolerance is not sensitivity to histamine, but is an excess of histamine accumulated in the 
system.  Histamine Intolerance often develops from low levels and activity of the enzyme diamine 
oxidase (DAO), the main compound responsible for breaking down or metabolizing ingested histamine-
rich food, alcohol, or drugs.⁹ 
WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE?  
Histamine intolerance presents itself with frequent headaches, migraines, digestive problems, 
respiratory and gastrointestinal issues, fatigue, and anxiety, and can cause uncomfortable reactions in 
almost every system of the body.⁹   
WHAT IS MAST CELL ACTIVATION SYNDROME (MCAS)? 
The main purposes of mast cells are to detect problems in the body and protect us. Mast cells are 
present throughout most of our bodies and secrete different chemicals during allergic reactions and 
infections. Mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS), however, causes a person to have repeated severe 
allergy symptoms and reactions affecting several body systems. In MCAS, mast cells release too many 
chemical agents, resulting in symptoms in the skin, gastrointestinal tract, heart, respiratory, and 
neurologic systems. Symptoms can start at any age, but usually begin in adulthood. The cause of MCAS 
is unknown, and sometimes those who suffer from it are unfairly dismissed as hypochondriacs or their 
symptoms as being “in their heads.” 
 

Page | 2 
 
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE AND MCAS? 
Because histamine intolerance implicates the mast cells, it is often confused with MCAS. The difference, 
however, is that MCAS is a complex situation that involves many different systems in the body. With 
MCAS the mast cells secrete several mediators in addition to histamine—whereas in histamine 
intolerance, the mast cells release only histamines.  
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE AFFECTED BY HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE?   
Although the exact number is not known, some estimates for those suffering from MCAS are as high as 
17% of the population.11  Roughly 1% of the population appears to have histamine intolerance; of those, 
80% are middle-aged.10 
WHAT IS THE LINK BETWEEN COFFEE AND HISTAMINE? 
Research on coffee and histamine is not extensive, but it all points to low-quality coffee and unripe 
coffee used in roasting. In high-quality coffee, histamine in green, roasted, and coffee beverages may 
not be found or may be present in small concentrations. However, even if concentrations are low, the 
presence of histamine could be enough to cause adverse effects in histamine-sensitive individuals or 
those with a higher load of amines that their bodies are trying to process. 
Regarding other contaminants and compounds in coffee, several are likely to affect those with MCAS: 
Molds, mycotoxins, pesticide residues, yeasts, and other biogenic amines that are common in coffee, 
such as putrescine, cadaverine and others. All these can potentiate histamine toxicity and other stresses 
on the mast cells.¹⁵   
Paying attention to all aspects of coffee brewing is also important:  Water, equipment, filters, grinders 
and flasks all could produce reactions, rather than the coffee itself. 
WHAT DOES PURITY COFFEE DO THAT LIMITS HISTAMINE OR MCAS REACTIONS? 
Quality:  Only the highest quality, certified organic, hand-picked, ripened fruits are picked to ensure the 
coffee is not underripe or problematic. We test for antioxidants and other nutrients and choose coffees 
that are the highest levels. We then roast conscientiously to retain as much antioxidant capacity as 
possible for each type of coffee, and we employ strict food safety measures and Good Manufacturing 
Practices. 
Contaminant testing:  We lab test coffees for pesticides, mold, mycotoxins, heavy metals, and other 
compounds that could cause problems. We only choose the cleanest and purest coffees. 
Environmental health:  Our coffees are also Rainforest Alliance and Smithsonian Bird Friendly certified, 
the environmental gold standard for sustainable, shade-grown coffee. Additionally, our coffees are 
produced on regenerative organic farms, meeting the highest standards in the world for soil health, 
animal welfare, and healthy communities. 
 
 

Page | 3 
 
THE COMPLEXITY OF STUDYING “COFFEE” AS ONE TYPE OF FOOD  
It is difficult to explain why some people react to coffee one way, and others another way.  Of course, all 
of us are different with our own internal chemistry, biology, and functionality of our many glands, 
organs, and moving parts.  Similarly, every coffee is different with its cocktail of compounds in different 
quantities. 
When talking about our reaction to coffee, there 
are an uncountable number of ways one coffee is 
different from another.  Coffee is one of nature’s 
most complex food products, made more complex 
by the expansive number of different cultivars 
(hundreds) grown in different environments (from 
Mexico to Brazil to Ethiopia to Sumatra) under 
different conditions (altitudes, latitudes, 
temperatures, rainfall, soil types) and then 
processed in diverse ways (washed, natural, and all 
the processes in between).  All of these factors 
impact the chemical compounds in the final raw 
coffee seed (“bean” -- it’s really a seed), which gets 
roasted at high temperatures in all sorts of 
different machines, which change the chemical 
compounds yet again.  Finally, the methods used 
to brew coffee can bring out different compounds 
in the coffee in different amounts. 
Considering our biological complexity with coffee’s 
botanical and culinary complexity, in this literature 
review we explore the subject of “histamine and coffee.”  We look at what histamine is, and how it 
might impact people when consuming usually undefined “coffee” that has been studied by scientists.  
Those research coffees are different than Purity coffee, which has been lab-tested and specially selected 
from regenerative or biodynamic farms that produce organic coffees.   
We encourage everyone to listen to their own bodies, and we hope that for those who love coffee and 
want to keep it in their diet, Purity Coffee makes them feel good.  Coffee has been shown to have 
numerous health benefits, many of which could potentially help those with MCAS:  Coffee has significant 
levels of polyphenols such as chlorogenic acids (CGA), which exert a variety of biological effects, 
including anti-inflammation and anti-bacterial.8, 17 Chlorogenic acids have demonstrated a decrease in 
immune and inflammatory markers in the liver, and CGA and their lactones (CGL) also have 
demonstrated hypoglycemic and neuroprotective properties, as well.   For those who are sensitive to 
caffeine, Purity’s Swiss Water® decaffeinated coffee is exceptional, meeting our highest standards. 

Page | 4 
 
VOCABULARY 
Amine - Compounds in the body that are derived 
from ammonia, and one or more of the 
hydrogen atoms have been replaced by a separate 
binding group. 
Bioactive amines - Low molecular weight organic 
bases produced by the metabolism of plants,  
animals, and microorganisms. These amines can be 
detected in fresh and processed foods and can be 
formed by trans-amination of aldehydes and 
ketones,  hydrolysis of nitrogen compounds,  
thermal decomposition or by decarboxylation of 
amino acids.⁷  In general, the term “bioactive 
amines” are considered colloquially as positive for 
health. However, in the literature, it is not 
uncommon for “bioactive” and “biogenic” to be used 
interchangeably.   
Biogenic Amine – Low-molecular-weight organic 
compounds produced by both plants and animals 
with one or more amine groups.³  They are 
nitrogenous compounds formed by enzymatic 
decarboxylation of certain amino acids, such as 
histidine and tryptophan. Examples include 
histamine, serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, 
and tyramine.⁷  In general, the term “biogenic 
amines” are considered colloquially as concerning to 
health because of their tendency to have adverse 
effects on human health. 
Cytosolic Protein - Involved in protein modification, 
mRNA degradation, metabolic processes, signal 
transduction, and cell death. Cytosol is a semi-fluid 
substance filling the interior of the cell, enclosed by 
the cell membrane and the membranes of different 
organelles, and makes up most of the cytoplasm. 
The cytosol is composed of water (approximately 
70% of the volume) and proteins (20-30% of the 
volume). ⁸ 
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) dependent 
proteins – Perform numerous metabolic functions, 
including DNA repair,  
Histamine –  Produced from the amino acid histidine 
and metabolized by the combined actions of 
histamine methyltransferase and MAO that acts as 
a neurotransmitter mediating arousal and attention, 
as well as a pro-inflammatory signal released 
from mast cells in response to allergic reactions or 
tissue damage. ⁹ 
Monoaminoxidase (MAO) and Diaminoxidase 
(DAO) - are FAD-dependent enzymes that catalyze 
the oxidative deamination of structurally diverse 
amines, including histamine.¹ 
Mast Cells - A type of white blood cell that is found 
in connective tissues all through the body, involved 
in inflammatory and various physiological processes. 
Salicylic Acid – A bitter phenolic acid found in a 
variety of plants, is used for a number of cosmetic 
and pharmaceutical purposes, most commonly as 
aspirin.  It is used as a skin exfoliant commercially to 
treat acne. 
Salicylates – Salts and esters of salicylic acid, 
salicylates are a general term for chemicals with 
salicylic acid as their base. They are a type of phenol, 
occurring naturally in many plants and plant foods. 
Salicylates are produced by plants as part of their 
natural defense system against diseases, insects, 
fungi, harmful bacteria, and environmental stress. 
 
 
 
 

Page | 2 
 
WHAT IS HISTAMINE? 
Histamine is an amine.  There are many types of amines, and bioactive amines perform dozens of 
physiologic and metabolic functions in living organisms. Biogenic amines are psychoactive, neuroactive, 
or vasoactive.⁶  Other examples of amines in the body include dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, 
and tyramine.  
Although many amines are related to human health and the prevention of several diseases, in high 
concentrations amines may become a toxicological risk.¹⁶  Certain foods contain varying concentrations 
of biogenic amines (BAs), which can add to the amounts naturally present in the body. Consuming even 
the slightest amount of excess biogenic amine could cause health problems such as gastrointestinal 
distress, drops, and rises in blood pressure, headaches, and migraines.  
Foods that are high in histamine include fermented foods, cured meats, cheeses, citrus fruits, tomatoes, 
avocados, wine, beer, and others.26  The consumption of foods containing high concentrations of BAs 
has been associated with varying health hazards, including food poisoning cases associated with 
histamines in fish. The number of biogenic amines in each food product is influenced by different 
production factors including the raw materials, microorganisms, processing, and conservation conditions 
of the food product. The amount of BAs present in a food product is usually indicative of the quality and 
safety of the product.¹³ 
Some amines function in the body as neurotransmitters that influence numerous different mental 
functions, and others regulate blood pressure, body temperature, and several other physiological 
processes. Each BA has a certain level or limit that must be maintained in the body to maintain 
homeostasis. Histamine in mammals causes dilation of capillaries, contraction of smooth muscle, and 
stimulation of gastric acid secretion.  It is released during allergic reactions, which is its most well-known 
characteristic.  Other functions of histamine include: 
• 
Fighting off allergens as part of the immune system. 
• 
Acting as a chemical messenger between the body and the brain. 
• 
Promoting stomach acid (HCL) release to aid in digestion. 
• 
Dilating blood vessels. 
 
There are histamine receptors all over 
the body, and histamine participates 
in the inflammatory process. 
Histamine production in the body is 
not a bad thing, the problem is when 
our body produces too much 
histamine that cannot be broken 
down. 
 
 
Anatomical drawings from 
Creative Commons (public 
domain) 

Page | 3 
 
HISTAMINE PRODUCTION AND REGULATION 
Histamine is produced by white blood cells called mast cells that release histamine in response to 
perceived allergic reactions or tissue damage. The close proximity of mast cells to blood vessels, 
together with the potent actions of histamine on blood vessels, raises the possibility that histamine may 
influence brain blood flow. High concentrations of histamine and histamine decarboxylase are found in 
neurons in the hypothalamus that send light but extensive projections to almost all regions of the brain 
and spinal cord. The central histamine projections mediate wakefulness, excitedness, and attention, 
similar to norepinephrine. This partially explains why antihistamines that cross the blood-brain barrier, 
such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl®), function as sedatives.⁴ 
HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE 
Histamine intolerance presents itself with frequent headaches, migraines, digestive problems, fatigue, 
anxiety, menstrual issues, bladder problems, rhinoconjunctival symptoms, asthma, hypotension, 
arrhythmia, urticaria, pruritus, flushing, eczema, vertigo, low blood pressure, and other uncomfortable 
and unexplained symptoms.⁹  Histamine intolerance is not sensitivity to histamine, but is an excess of 
histamine accumulated in the system.  Normally histamine is detoxified by amine oxidases, and 
individuals with low amine oxidase activity are at risk of histamine toxicity.¹ 
Histamine Intolerance often develops from low levels and activity of the enzyme diamine oxidase (DAO), 
the main compound responsible for breaking down or metabolizing ingested histamine-rich food, 
alcohol, or drugs.⁹ DAO, when functioning as a secretory protein, scavenges extracellular histamine. 
However, when ingested substances release histamine or block DAO,  degradation due to reduced DAO 
activity results in the symptoms listed above.  Similarly, another enzyme that acts on histamine is N-
methyltransferase, a cytosolic protein that can convert histamine only in the intracellular space of cells.  
• Physical, emotional, environmental
Stress or trigger
•Released 
Cortisol 
•Activated
Sympathetic nervous system 
•Release more histamine into bloodstream
Mast cells 

Page | 4 
 
The root cause of histamine intolerance is usually found in the gut.  Infections in the gut such as small 
intestine bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), leaky gut, Candida, and other fungi overgrowth, or even parasites 
can decrease the amount of DAO enzyme available to break down histamine in the body.¹⁴   
Other causes include: 
• 
Mast Cell Activation Syndrome: A trigger causes the body to think it is attacked, thus releasing 
histamine. 
• 
Hyperthyroidism (too much thyroid hormone) increases histamine receptors in the body, which 
leads to an increased response to histamine when combined with reduced DAO activity.¹⁰ 
• 
Nutrient deficiencies: Lack of vitamin C and/or B vitamins, zinc and copper may lead to DAO 
dysfunction or reduced activity. 
• 
Gluten intolerance 
• 
Genetic mutations 
• 
Certain medications, including NSAIDs, antidepressants, immune modulators, antiarrhythmics, 
antihistamines, and histamine blockers. Antihistamines are useful short term and tend to 
decrease DAO enzyme production over time. 
When a person has nutrient deficiencies, gut issues, high estrogen, stress, and other causes of histamine 
intolerance, the symptoms may not appear until a trigger is consumed that tips the scales into a 
reaction, such as consuming a high-histamine food like avocado.  This helps to explain why people might 
not have reactions all the time:  If there are fewer underlying causes, a person may be able to manage a 
high histamine food without a reaction.  Common conditions that, when aggregated, can set someone 
up for a histamine reaction include: 
• 
Stress: Activates sympathetic nervous system which activates 
more mast cells which release histamine 
• 
Gut health: Foods and microorganisms that are foreign to the 
gut and trigger histamine release 
• 
Adrenals: Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) access 
disorder (Long-term stress resulting in chronic over-activation 
of the HPA axis can lead to anxiety, depression, mood swings, 
and irritability.) 
Unfortunately, there is yet to be a simple, effective histamine intolerance test.  It is recommended to do 
an elimination test: First stop eating high histamine triggering foods, then one by one reintroduce a 
food.  If symptoms present themselves, it is likely histamine intolerance. 
HISTAMINE’S CONNECTION TO COFFEE 
Although research on coffee and histamine is not extensive, it points to histamine in green and roasted 
coffee beans and coffee beverages in low concentrations.  Research has also shown that most histamine 
is degraded during roasting.¹⁵  In 2005 Oliveira et. al. measured several amines in coffee, and found 
histamine in low-quality beans; however, during roasting the histamine degraded to negligible levels 
(0.05mg per 100g) in the first 8 minutes.19  So why do we worry about histamine in coffee?  Even though 
these concentrations are low, the presence of histamine still could be enough to cause adverse effects in 

Page | 5 
 
histamine-sensitive individuals with gastrointestinal, neurological, hemodynamic, or cutaneous 
symptoms.  Other amines are present in coffee, such as putrescine and cadaverine, which can 
potentiate histamine toxicity.¹⁵  
 
 
 
Research has shown that the presence of histamine is exclusively in lower-quality coffee, suggesting 
that this amine is associated with the presence of defective beans.5,19 Coffee is an agricultural product, 
and like all foods from nature, it varies in quality from extremely low grade to high-scoring specialty 
grade.  A rough estimate of total specialty coffee production is around 20-30% of the world’s total coffee 
production18.  This means about three-quarters of the coffee roasted is below specialty, descending to 
the lowest grades that contain large numbers of defective beans.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unhealthy green coffee full of defects. 
Healthy defect-free coffee 

Page | 6 
 
Coffee defects can be caused by numerous factors during the farming, harvesting, processing, or drying 
of the coffee. During farming, defects come primarily from pests and diseases, but also unhealthy plants 
tend to produce unhealthy coffee, which means soil quality and hydration also are critical to producing 
healthy coffee.   
Coffee fruits can ripen at different rates, so picking by hand and never gathering fallen fruit from the 
ground are still the best methods for avoiding underripe, overripe, or unhealthy fruit, all of which have 
nutritional and organoleptic concerns.  Hand-selecting is labor-intensive and involves re-visiting the 
same plants throughout the season several times.  The other option for picking is mechanical harvesting 
followed by optical sorting, which can be used to maintain higher quality coffee, although this option is 
available only to large-scale operations with certain topographic conditions. If coffee is not harvested 
properly, defective beans can result, which may lead to histamine.  
 
 
 
 
Coffee that has 
ripened on the 
plant uniformly. 

Page | 7 
 
Post-harvest grading prior to processing and drying is 
important:  Separating out the unripe fruit is critical to 
avoid defective beans for high-quality coffee and 
potentially to avoid histamine since unripe beans 
demonstrate higher histamine levels.⁵ However, once 
separated out, these defective beans are often blended 
with other low-quality beans and sold, which makes 
financial sense for the producer and allows for a low-
cost roasted coffee for consumers.⁵  
Once the coffee is harvested and sorted, it is processed, 
which simply means the coffee seeds (“coffee beans” or 
“green coffee”) are removed from the coffee fruit. 
Regardless of the method, some level of fermentation is 
involved, whether controlled by the farmer or simply as 
the inevitable, natural way microbes help to break 
down the fruit layer that clings to the seeds. There are 
three main methods for processing: 
1. The “natural” method, also known as “dry 
processed,” is the most traditional and is commonly 
used in regions with limited water resources. The coffee 
cherries are spread out to dry in the sun. Until they are dried, a certain amount of fermentation is 
occurring under the skin of the fruit until the moisture evaporates, which ceases the microbial 
activity of fermentation.  The dried skin and parchment are together hulled off the green coffee 
before export. 
 
2. The “washed” method uses controlled fermentation. The skin and pulp are removed from the coffee 
cherry after harvesting, and the beans are put into fermentation tanks with water to remove the layer 
of mucilage that is still attached to the parchment skin on the bean. The fermentation process, with 
naturally occurring microorganisms (wild yeasts and bacteria present in the environment), causes this 
layer to break down and disappear. The beans are then rinsed clean and dried in their parchment 
either in the sun or in mechanical driers.  They are hulled before bagging for export. 
 
3. The “semi-washed” method has many different names and variations. The pulp is removed from the 
cherry, but then the beans are set out to dry with the mucilage still on them, which means a shorter 
fermentation time depending on how long it takes the moisture to evaporate.  The dried-fruit-coated 
parchment is hulled before being bagged for export. 
How does the fermentation in coffee affect those with MCAS?  This is a puzzling question to answer because 
there appears to be no published research on the topic. One crucial thing to remember is that green coffee 
is roasted usually for at least 8 minutes at over 400ºF (204ºC), often longer and hotter.  This is considered a 
“kill step” in food safety, which means microorganisms cannot survive the roasting process.  Any yeast or 
bacteria involved in fermentation would be destroyed during this step, but whether there is something left 
behind that can survive the heat and impact MCAS is unknown at this point in our research.  We do know, 
Close-up of a coffee fruit with skin partially 
removed and pulp surrounding the seed (“bean”). 

Page | 8 
 
however, that once the coffee is removed from the roaster, it is of utmost importance that the coffee is 
protected from contamination during the packaging process. Good Manufacturing Practices for food safety 
must be employed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A WORD ABOUT GREEN COFFEE EXTRACT 
Green coffee extract is found in supplements, diet pills, beverages, and cosmetics.  Unless the product 
with green coffee has been tested for histamine, it is impossible to know if defective green coffee has 
been used to make the extract or powder. Additionally, although we were unable to find direct research 
on green coffee consumption and histamine, avoiding products with green coffee extract should be 
considered for those concerned with histamine.  
 
 
Coffee with skin removed and pulp drying on the outside 
of the seed, which is actually protected by an outer layer 
of thick skin called “parchment” that must be hulled off 
once dry. 
“Semi-washed” (or “honey” or “pulped natural” or 
several other terms) coffee drying in the sun. The 
warm reddish color is from the enzymatic 
browning of the fruit, just like apples turn brown 
when they are cut. 

Page | 9 
 
CONSCIENTIOUS HOT BREWING AND COLD BREWING 
It is a way of life for those with histamine intolerance to consider what other things they are ingesting 
along with their cups of coffee that may be high in histamine. Impurities may also slip in during beverage 
preparation, not to mention if anything is added to the final cup (sweeteners and creamers).   
Water Quality:  Because coffee is more than 98% water, the quality of the water used is critical.   
Sanitary equipment: In addition, brewing equipment should always be kept clean and sanitary.  
Molds and microorganisms can lurk in damp, dark, wet crevices of machines, and it is important to 
wash parts of the brewer and allow those parts to air dry.  Manual pourover brew methods, like 
Chemex, are the simplest in terms of equipment and easy to maintain sanitation.  Also, be aware of 
the material into which your coffee is brewed—some metal carafes or travel mugs may contain 
nickel, which has been known to cause reactions, and some may have BPA or phthalates.  Glass or 
ceramic containers may be a better bet. 
Grinders:  Grinding coffee fresh from whole beans before each brew usually provides the best 
sensory experience, and burr grinders produce more uniform grinds than blade grinders.  However, 
burr grinders retain residue and small coffee particles within the “teeth” of both the upper and 
lower burrs.  If you have had a coffee in the past that gave you a histamine-type reaction, and you 
used a burr grinder, you will need to “purge” your grinder.  The easiest way to do this is to send a 
small amount (25 grams) of coffee that does NOT give you a reaction through the grinder, and throw 
those grounds in the compost.  This practice will have “seasoned” the grinder with good coffee. 
Filters:  Use a type of filter that matches your brew method and is made from a material that does 
not cause you to have reactions.  Three common filter materials are noted below, with the point 
being that you choose one that meets your health needs: 
Paper: Review the materials from which your paper filters are made and how they are packaged—
are they bleached or brown paper? Are they made of natural fibers that may contain 
allergens?  Are they in packaging that is sealed properly, or can contaminants get into the 
package? Paper filters also can filter out most of the coffee oils that contain diterpenes, which 
are considered beneficial to liver health.  Some people may prefer to allow those oils into their 
finished cup. 
Metal:  Metal filters may also be used in some brewing equipment, but should be non-reactive 
and high-quality stainless steel. Avoid double metal filters, which are difficult to clean and 
retain oils and particles that can go rancid. Espresso machines rely on metal brew baskets in 
their portafilters, which also must be kept clean whether at home or in a café—not only oil 
residue lurks in metal filters, but microparticles of coffee may get stuck in the mesh or holes. 
Cloth:  These are good options for getting the healthy coffee oils into your cup, while at the same 
time capturing micro-grounds and keeping your cup sediment-free, if you prefer it that way.  
Of course, washing and drying cloth filters involve details that can affect health, too, and at 
some point, they will start to infuse off-flavors into the brew. 

Page | 10 
 
COLD BREW HEALTH POINTS: 
Cold brew involves ground coffee extracted with water at room temperature (“ambient” = not chilled or 
heated) or cooler and steeped for an extended period of time to extract flavor compounds and soluble 
solids from the coffee.  The key point is that the water is not hot.  The brewing process swaps time for 
temperature – instead of brewing with near-boiling water over a few minutes, cold brewing typically 
uses cool water and extended periods of time (12-24 hours) to extract an optimal amount of flavor 
compounds and solids from the ground beans. Cold brew flavors vary widely from the same coffee 
brewed at higher temperatures.   
Anyone doing cold brewing must consider food safety. Yeast, bacteria, and mold live at ambient 
temperatures (danger zone 40º to 140ºF). Using water that is not near boiling increases the risk that any 
mold or pathogens could develop in the finished brew.  Cold brewing in a refrigerator is considered safer 
than ambient brewing, but still, certain microorganisms can grow and survive at these temperatures. 
We have all experienced products in our fridges that have got moldy or spoiled, and coffee is not 
immune. Sources of microbial contamination include water, containers, equipment, environment, 
personnel, and ingredients.22  
On the other hand, there are numerous studies showing the anti-microbial compounds of coffee 
produced during roasting.23-25 Caffeic acid and trigonelline showed inhibitory effects against the growth 
of microorganisms. The antimicrobial activity of caffeic acid has demonstrated appreciable antibacterial 
activity against Pseudomonas, E. coli, S. aureus, and Bacillus cereus. Caffeine, chlorogenic acid, and 
protocatechuic acid showed particularly strong effects against certain pathogens, too, while trigonelline, 
caffeine, and protocatechuic acids showed potential natural antimicrobial agents against Salmonella 
enterica. 
Cold brew can be made safely, and many people enjoy this brew method particularly because of the way 
it is easy on the gastrointestinal system.  To be safe for MCAS, we recommend keeping the freshly made 
cold brew concentrate in the fridge for no more than a week. Mark the expiration date on the container 
with masking tape and a marker. When the cold brew is finished, thoroughly clean the carafe and any 
other parts (filter—take it apart—and lid), making sure each tiny nook and cranny has been sanitized.  
Air dry and store the device in a hygienic area. 
FINAL THOUGHTS 
It is possible for those suffering from histamine intolerance or MCAS to enjoy coffee, but it must be the 
right type of coffee and of the very highest quality.  While specialty grade coffee is considered the 
highest quality coffee and has standards that limit defects that are key for those wanting to avoid 
histamine, alone that is not enough.  And while certified organic coffees should be free of pesticide 
residue, and basic food safety practices are observed at all times, often organic coffees don’t reach that 
standard.   
We need to ask more from our coffee when it is for our health. All coffee should be tested for mold, 
yeast, mycotoxins, and other contaminants, but very few are. In addition to keeping the toxins out, 
coffee should be grown in its natural environment, which increases the likelihood that it is hand-
selected, which in turn reduces the risk that under-ripe cherries are picked. Look for things like 

Page | 11 
 
Smithsonian Certified Bird-Friendly or Demeter Certified Biodynamic. Finally, your coffee must be fresh 
to avoid any of the lipids turning rancid on the coffee, which could cause gastrointestinal and other 
issues. 
We would love your feedback as we learn more. 
REFERENCES 
All photos © Ildi Revi, Chief Coffee Officer of Purity Coffee. 
 
1. Cesura AM. Monoamine Oxidases. xPharm: The Comprehensive Pharmacology Reference. Published 
online 2007:1-5. doi:10.1016/b978-008055232-3.60497-0 
2. Comas-Basté O, Sánchez-Pérez S, Veciana-Nogués MT, Latorre-Moratalla M, Vidal-Carou M del C. 
Histamine Intolerance: The Current State of the Art. Biomolecules. 2020;10(8). 
doi:10.3390/biom10081181 
3. Danquah AO, Benjakul S, Simpson BK. Biogenic Amines in Foods. Food Biochemistry and Food Processing. 
2012;(Chapter 43):820-832. doi:10.1002/9781118308035.ch43 
4. Deuchars S, Deuchars J. Neuroscience-a novelty for the nervous: Neuroscience (1997). Purves D, 
Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, Katz LC, LaMantia A-S, McNamara JO (Eds). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer 
Associates, Inc. 562 pp. BioEssays. 1998;20(10):871-872. doi:3.0.co;2-f">10.1002/(sici)1521-
1878(199810)20:10<871::aid-bies15>3.0.co;2-f 
5. Dias EC, Pereira RGFA, Borém FM, et al. Biogenic Amine Profile in Unripe Arabica Coffee Beans Processed 
According to Dry and Wet Methods. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2012;60(16):4120-4125. 
doi:10.1021/jf2046703 
6. Bomtempo LL, Costa AM, Lima H, Engeseth N, Gloria MBA. Bioactive amines in Passiflora are affected by 
species and fruit development. Food Research International. 2016;89(Chapter 22):733-738. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2016.09.028 
7. Halász A, Baráth Á, Simon-Sarkadi L, Holzapfel W. Biogenic amines and their production by 
microorganisms in food. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 1994;5(2):42-49. doi:10.1016/0924-
2244(94)90070-1 
8. León D, Medina S, Londoño- Londoño J, Jiménez-Cartagena C, Ferreres F, Gil-Izquierdo A. 2019. Anti-
inflammatory Activity of Coffee (Ch. 3) in Coffee: Consumption and Health Implication edited by Farah Al; 
Royal Society of Chemistry. 
9. Luby-Phelps K. Cytoarchitecture and Physical Properties of Cytoplasm: Volume, Viscosity, Diffusion, 
Intracellular Surface Area. International Review of Cytology. Published online 1999:189-221. 
doi:10.1016/s0074-7696(08)60527-6 
10. Maintz L, Novak N. Histamine and histamine intolerance. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2007;85(5):1185-1196. doi:10.1093/ajcn/85.5.1185 
11. McClure J. https://www.kpwashingtonresearch.org/news-and-events/blog/2016/june/do-mast-cells-hold-
key-chronic-and-unexplained-disease. 
12. Metcalfe DD, Baram D, Mekori YA. Mast cells. Physiological Reviews. 1997;77(4):1033-1079. 
doi:10.1152/physrev.1997.77.4.1033 
13. Nout MJR. Food Technologies: Fermentation. Encyclopedia of Food Safety. Published online 2014:168-
177. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-378612-8.00270-5 
14. Rodriguez MBR, Carneiro C da S, Feijó MB da S, Júnior CAC, Mano SB. Bioactive Amines: Aspects of Quality 
and Safety in Food. Food and Nutrition Sciences. 2014;05(02):138-146. doi:10.4236/fns.2014.52018 
15. Ruiz-Capillas C, Herrero A. Impact of Biogenic Amines on Food Quality and Safety. Foods. 2019;8(2):62. 
doi:10.3390/foods8020062 

Page | 12 
 
16. Taban BM, Dogan Halkman HB, Halkman AK. MICROFLORA OF THE INTESTINE | Biology of the 
Enterococcus spp. Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology. Published online 2014:652-657. doi:10.1016/b978-
0-12-384730-0.00211-1 
17. Editor: Adriana Farah. Coffee. Consumption and Health Implications. Royal Society Of Chemistry; 
2019:548-556. 
18. European Food Safety Authority. Scientific Opinion on risk based control of biogenic amine formation in 
fermented foods. EFSA Journal. 2011;9(10):2393. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2011.2393 
19. Lee K, Choi YI, Im S-T, et al. Riboflavin Inhibits Histamine-Dependent Itch by Modulating Transient 
Receptor Potential Vanilloid 1 (TRPV1). Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience. 2021;14. 
doi:10.3389/fnmol.2021.643483 
20. Reinhart R. https://scanews.coffee/video/reco-2019/ric-rhinehart-on-the-coffee-price-crisis-the-role-and-
responsibility-of-specialty-coffee-reco-2019/ 
21. Oliveira SD, Franca AS, Glória MBA, Borges MLA. The effect of roasting on the presence of bioactive 
amines in coffees of different qualities. Food Chem. 2005, 90, 287−291. 
22. Zuniga M. (2016, May 16). Cold brew: Category or craze? Re;co: The Specialty Coffee Symposium. 
https://youtu.be/5KFo4c0UlLg. 
23. Almeida A, Naghetini C., Santos V, Glória M. 2004. In Vitro antimicrobial activity of coffee extracts on 
Streptococcus mutans. In 20th International Conference on Coffee Science, Bengaluru (Bangalore), India. 
Proceedings of ASIC Conferences. pp 242-248. 
24. Almeida, A., Farah, A. Silva, D., Nunan, E. Glória, B. 2006. Antibacterial Activity of Coffee Extracts and 
Selected Coffee Chemical Compounds against Enterobacteria. J. Agric. Food Chem., 54, 8738-8743. 
25. Baranowski J., Nagel C. 1982. Inhibition of Pseudomonas fluorescens by hydroxycinnamic acids and their 
alkyl esters. J. Food Sci., 47, 1587-1589. 
26. O’Hara B. 2022. Functional Naturopathy: https://mastcell360.com/low-histamine-foods-list/ last 
referenced 4 Sept 2022. 
