Page | 1 
 
HISTAMINE AND COFFEE 
 
INTRODUCTION:  
 
It is difficult to explain why some people react to coffee one way, and others another way.  Of 
course, all of us are different with our own internal chemistry, biology, and functionality of our 
many glands, organs and moving parts.  Similarly, every coffee is different with is cocktail of 
compounds in different quantities. 
When talking about our reaction to coffee, 
there are an almost infinite number of ways 
one coffee is different from another.  Coffee is 
one of nature’s most complex food products, 
made more complex by the expansive number 
of different cultivars (hundreds) grown in 
different environments (from Mexico to Brazil 
to Burundi to Sumatra) under different 
conditions (altitudes, latitudes, temperatures, 
rainfall, soil types) and then processed in 
different ways (washed, natural, and all the 
processes in between).  All of these factors 
impact the chemical compounds in final raw 
coffee seed (“bean” -- it’s really a seed), which 
gets roasted at high temperatures all sorts of 
different ways, which change the chemical 
compounds yet again.  Finally, the methods 
used to brew coffee can bring out different 
compounds in the coffee in different amounts. 
Considering our biological complexity with coffee’s botanical and culinary complexity, in this 
literature review we explore the subject of “histamine and coffee.”  We look at what histamine 
is, and how it might impact different people different ways when consuming usually undefined 
“coffee” that has been studied by scientists.  Those coffees are likely different than Purity 
coffee, that has been lab-tested and specially selected from regenerative or biodynamic farms 
that produce organic coffees.   
 

Page | 2 
 
VOCABULARY 
Amine - Compounds in the body that are derived 
from ammonia, and one or more of the 
hydrogen atoms have been replaced by a separate 
binding group. 
Bioactive amines - Low molecular weight organic 
bases produced  by  the  metabolism  of  plants,  
animals  and  microorganisms. These amines  can  be  
detected  in  fresh  and  processed  foods  and  can  
be  formed  by  trans-amination  of  aldehydes  and  
ketones,  hydrolysis  of  nitrogen  compounds,  
thermal  decomposition  or  by  decarboxylation of 
amino acids.⁷  In general, the term “bioactive 
amines” are considered colloquially as positive for 
health. However, in the literature it is not 
uncommon for “bioactive” and “biogenic” to be used 
interchangeably.   
Biogenic Amine - Low-molecular weight organic 
compounds produced by both plants and animals 
with one or more amine group.³  They are 
nitrogenous compounds formed by enzymatic 
decarboxylation of certain amino acids, such as 
histidine and tryptophan. Examples include 
histamine, serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, 
and tyramine.⁷  In general, the term “biogenic 
amines” are considered colloquially as concerning to 
health because of their tendency to have adverse 
effects on human health. 
Cytosolic Protein - Mainly involved in protein 
modification, mRNA degradation, metabolic 
processes, signal transduction, and cell death. 
Cytosol is a semi-fluid substance filling the interior of 
the cell, enclosed by the cell membrane and the 
membranes of different organelles, and makes up 
most of cytoplasm. Cytosol is mainly composed of 
water (approximately 70% of the volume) and 
proteins (20-30% of the volume). ⁸ 
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) dependent 
proteins – Perform numerous metabolic functions, 
including DNA repair,  
Histamine –  Produced from the amino acid histidine 
and metabolized by the combined actions of 
histamine methyltransferase and MAO that acts as 
a neurotransmitter mediating arousal and attention, 
as well as a pro-inflammatory signal released 
from mast cells in response to allergic reactions or 
tissue damage. ⁹ 
Monoaminoxidase (MAO) and Diaminoxidase 
(DAO) - are FAD-dependent enzymes that catalyze 
the oxidative deamination of structurally diverse 
amines, including histamine.¹ 
Mast Cells - A type of white blood cell that is found 
in connective tissues all through the body, involved 
in inflammatory and various physiological processes. 
Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS) – The body 
produces histamine (degranulation) under abnormal 
circumstances (when it is not supposed to). 
Salicylic Acid – A bitter phenolic acid found in a 
variety of plants, is used for a number of cosmetic 
and pharmaceutical purposes, most commonly as 
aspirin.  It is used as a skin exfoliant commercially to 
treat acne. 
Salicylates – Salts and esters of salicylic acid, 
salicylates are a general term for chemicals with 
salicylic acid as their base. They are a type of phenol, 
occurring naturally in many plants and plant foods. 
Salicylates are produced by plants as part of their 
natural defense system against diseases, insects, 
fungi, harmful bacteria, and environmental stress. 
 
 

Page | 2 
 
WHAT IS HISTAMINE? 
Histamine is an amine.  There are many types of amines, and bioactive amines perform dozens 
of physiologic and metabolic functions in living organisms. Biogenic amines are psychoactive, 
neuroactive, or vasoactive.⁶  Other examples of amines in the body include dopamine, 
norepinephrine, serotonin, and tyramine.  
Although many amines are related to human health and prevention of several diseases, in high 
concentrations amines may become a toxicological risk.¹⁶  Certain foods contain varying 
concentrations of biogenic amines (BAs), which can add to the amounts naturally present in the 
body. Consuming even the slightest amount of excess biogenic amine could cause health 
problems such as gastrointestinal distress, drops and raises in blood pressure, headaches, and 
migraines.  
Foods that are high in histamine include fermented foods, cured meats, cheeses, citrus fruits, 
tomatoes, avocados, wine, beer and others.  The consumption of foods containing high 
concentrations of BAs has been associated with varying health hazards, including food 
poisoning cases associated with histamines in fish. The number of biogenic amines in each food 
product is influenced by different production factors including the raw materials, 
microorganisms, processing, and conservation conditions of the food product. The amount of 
BAs present in a food product is usually indicative of the quality and safety of the product.¹³ 
Some amines function in the body as neurotransmitters that 
influence numerous different mental functions, and others 
regulate blood pressure, body temperature, and several other 
physiological processes. Each BA has a certain level or limit that 
must be maintained in the body to maintain homeostasis. 
Histamine in mammals causes dilation of capillaries, contraction 
of smooth muscle, and stimulation of gastric acid secretion.  It is 
released during allergic reactions, which is its most well-known 
characteristics.  Other functions of histamine include: 
• 
Fighting off allergens as part of 
immune system. 
• 
Acting as chemical messenger 
between the body and the brain. 
• 
Promoting stomach acid (HCL) 
release to aid in digestion. 
• 
Dilating blood vessels. 
 
 

Page | 3 
 
 
There are histamine receptors all over the body, and histamine is involved in the inflammatory 
process. Histamine production in the body is not a bad thing, the problem is when our body 
produces too much histamine that cannot be broken down. 
HISTAMINE PRODUCTION AND REGULATION 
Histamine is produced by white blood cells called mast cells that release histamine in response 
to perceived allergic reactions or tissue damage. The close proximity of mast cells to blood 
vessels, together with the potent actions of histamine on blood vessels, raise the possibility that 
histamine may influence brain blood flow. High concentrations of histamine and histamine 
• Physical, emotional, environmental
Stress or trigger
•Released 
Cortisol 
•Activated
Sympathetic nervous system 
•Release more histamine into bloodstream
Mast cells 
Anatomical drawings from Creative 
Commons (public domain) 

Page | 4 
 
decarboxylase are found in neurons in the hypothalamus that send light but extensive 
projections to almost all regions of the brain and spinal cord. The central histamine projections 
mediate wakefulness, excitedness and attention, similar to norepinephrine. This partially 
explains why antihistamines that cross the blood-brain barrier, such as diphenhydramine 
(Benadryl®), act as sedatives.⁴ 
HISTAMINE INTOLERANCE 
Histamine intolerance presents itself with frequent headaches, migraines, digestive problems, 
fatigue, anxiety, menstrual issues, bladder problems, rhinoconjunctival symptoms, asthma, 
hypotension, arrhythmia, urticaria, pruritus, flushing, eczema, vertigo, low blood pressure and 
other generally uncomfortable and unexplained symptoms.⁹  Histamine intolerance is not a 
sensitivity to histamine, but rather is an excess of histamine accumulated in the system.  
Normally histamine is detoxified by amine oxidases, and individuals with low amine oxidase 
activity are at risk of histamine toxicity.¹ 
Histamine Intolerance often develops from low levels and activity of the enzyme diamine 
oxidase (DAO), the main compound responsible for breaking down or metabolizing ingested 
histamine-rich food, alcohol, or drugs.⁹ DAO, when functioning as a secretory protein, 
scavenges extracellular histamine. However, when ingested substances release histamine or 
block DAO,  degradation due to reduced DAO activity results in the symptoms listed above.  
Similarly, another enzyme that acts on histamine is N-methyltransferase, a cytosolic protein 
that can convert histamine only in the intracellular space of cells.  
The root cause of histamine intolerance is usually found in the gut.  Infections in the gut such as 
small intestine bacterial overgrowth (SIBO),leaky gut, Candida, and other fungi overgrowth, or 
even parasites can decrease the amount of DAO enzyme available to break down histamine in 
the body.¹⁴   
Other causes include: 
• 
Mast Cell Activation Syndrome: A trigger causes the body to think it is attacked, thus 
releasing histamine. 
• 
Hyperthyroidism (too much thyroid hormones) increases histamine receptors in the 
body, which leads to an increased response to histamine when combined with reduced 
DAO activity.¹⁰ 
• 
Nutrient deficiencies: Lack of vitamin C and/or B vitamins, zinc and copper may lead to 
DAO dysfunction or reduced activity. 
• 
Gluten intolerance 
• 
Genetic mutations 

Page | 5 
 
• 
Certain medications, including NSAIDs, antidepressants, immune modulators, 
antiarrhythmics, antihistamines, and histamine blockers. Antihistamines are useful only 
short term, and tend to decrease DAO enzyme production over time. 
When a person has nutrient deficiencies, gut issues, high estrogen, stress and other causes of 
histamine intolerance, the symptoms may not appear until a trigger is consumed that tips the 
scales into a reaction, such as consuming a high histamine food like avocado.  This helps to 
explain why people might not have reactions all the time:  If there are fewer underlying causes, 
a person may be able to handle a high histamine food without a reaction.  Common conditions 
that, when aggregated, can set someone up for a histamine reaction include: 
• Stress: Activates sympathetic nervous system which 
activates more mast cells which release histamine 
• Gut health: Foods and microorganisms that are foreign to 
the gut and trigger histamine release 
• Adrenals: Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) access 
disorder (Long term stress resulting in chronic over 
activation of the HPA axis can lead to anxiety, depression, 
mood swings and irritability.) 
Unfortunately, there is yet to be an effective histamine intolerance test.  Rather it is 
recommended to do an elimination test: First stop eating high histamine triggering foods, then 
one by one reintroduce a food.  If symptoms present themselves, it is likely histamine 
intolerance. 
 
HISTAMINE’S CONNECTION TO COFFEE 
 
 
 
Research has shown that the presence of histamine is exclusively in lower quality coffee, 
suggesting that this amine is associated with the presence of defective beans.5,19 Coffee is an 
agricultural product, and like all foods from nature, it varies in quality from very low grade to 
high scoring specialty grade.  A rough estimate of total specialty coffee production is around 20-
30% of the world’s total coffee production18.  This means about three quarters of the coffee 
roasted is below specialty, descending to the lowest grades that contain large amounts of 
defective beans.   

Page | 6 
 
 
 
Coffee defects can be caused by numerous factors during farming, harvesting, processing, or 
drying of the coffee. During farming, defects come primarily from pests and diseases, but also 
unhealthy plants tend to produce unhealthy coffee, which means soil quality and hydration also 
are important to healthy coffee.   
Coffee fruits can ripen at different rates, so picking by hand and never gathering fallen fruit 
from the ground are still the best methods for avoiding underripe, overripe or unhealthy fruit, 
all of which have nutritional and organoleptic concerns.  This type of harvesting is labor-
intensive and involves re-visiting the same plants throughout the season several times.  The 
other option for picking is mechanical harvesting followed by optical sorting, which can be used 
to maintain higher quality coffee, although this option is available mainly to large-scale 
operations with certain 
topographic 
restrictions. If coffee is 
not harvested properly, 
defective beans can 
result, which may lead 
to histamine. 
Unhealthy green coffee full of defects. 
Healthy defect-free coffee 

Page | 7 
 
 
 
Coffee that has ripened on the plant uniformly. 
Coffee seed (“bean”) from ripe fruit. 
Coffee seed from UNRIPE fruit.  
May have histamine. 

Page | 8 
 
Post-harvest grading prior to processing and drying is important:  Separating out the unripe 
fruit is critical to avoid defective beans for high quality coffee. However, once separated out, 
these defective beans are then blended with other low-quality beans and sold, which makes 
financial sense for the producer and allows for a low-cost roasted coffee to consumers.⁵  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once the coffee is harvested and sorted, it is 
processed, when the skin and fruit is 
separated from the coffee seeds (“coffee 
beans”), the coffee is dried, milled and bagged 
for export.  There are different methods of 
processing, some of which may  determine the 
amount of histamine in the coffee.  
Research on coffee and histamine is not extensive, but it all points to histamine in green and 
roasted coffee beans and coffee beverages in low concentrations.  Furthermore, histamine is 
degraded during roasting.¹⁵  In 2005 Oliveira et. al. measured several amines in coffee, and 
found histamine in low quality beans; however, during roasting the histamine degraded to 
negligible levels (0.05mg per 100g) in the first 8 minutes.19 Even though these concentrations 
are low, the presence of histamine could be enough to cause adverse effects in histamine-
Close-up of a coffee fruit with skin 
partially removed and pulp 
surrounding the seed (“bean”). 
Coffee with skin removed and pulp drying on 
the outside of the seed, which is actually 
protected by an outer layer of thick skin called 
“parchment” that must be hulled off once dry. 

Page | 9 
 
sensitive individuals with gastrointestinal, neurological, hemodynamic, or cutaneous symptoms.  
Other amines present, such as putrescine and cadaverine, can potentiate histamine’s toxicity.¹⁵  
It is important for those with histamine intolerance to consider what other foods they are 
eating that may be high in histamine.   
Regarding coffee, avoiding low quality roasted coffee is critical to avoid histamine.  Additionally, 
although we were unable to find direct research on green coffee consumption and histamine, 
avoiding products with green coffee extract should be considered for those concerned with 
histamine.  Green coffee extract is found in supplements, diet pills, beverages and cosmetics.  
Unless the product with green coffee has been tested for histamine, it is impossible to know if 
defective green coffee has been used to make the extract or powder.  
Finally, although the research showed that virtually no histamine survived the roasting process, 
we recommend always drinking a high quality organic coffee to avoid any possible histamine 
exposure.  
 
REFERENCES 
All photos © Ildi Revi, Chief Coffee Officer of Purity Coffee. 
 
1. Cesura AM. Monoamine Oxidases. xPharm: The Comprehensive Pharmacology Reference. Published 
online 2007:1-5. doi:10.1016/b978-008055232-3.60497-0 
2. Comas-Basté O, Sánchez-Pérez S, Veciana-Nogués MT, Latorre-Moratalla M, Vidal-Carou M del C. 
Histamine Intolerance: The Current State of the Art. Biomolecules. 2020;10(8). 
doi:10.3390/biom10081181 
3. Danquah AO, Benjakul S, Simpson BK. Biogenic Amines in Foods. Food Biochemistry and Food Processing. 
2012;(Chapter 43):820-832. doi:10.1002/9781118308035.ch43 
4. Deuchars S, Deuchars J. Neuroscience-a novelty for the nervous: Neuroscience (1997). Purves D, 
Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, Katz LC, LaMantia A-S, McNamara JO (Eds). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer 
Associates, Inc. 562 pp. BioEssays. 1998;20(10):871-872. doi:3.0.co;2-f">10.1002/(sici)1521-
1878(199810)20:10<871::aid-bies15>3.0.co;2-f 
5. Dias EC, Pereira RGFA, Borém FM, et al. Biogenic Amine Profile in Unripe Arabica Coffee Beans Processed 
According to Dry and Wet Methods. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2012;60(16):4120-4125. 
doi:10.1021/jf2046703 
6. Bomtempo LL, Costa AM, Lima H, Engeseth N, Gloria MBA. Bioactive amines in Passiflora are affected by 
species and fruit development. Food Research International. 2016;89(Chapter 22):733-738. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2016.09.028 
7. Halász A, Baráth Á, Simon-Sarkadi L, Holzapfel W. Biogenic amines and their production by 
microorganisms in food. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 1994;5(2):42-49. doi:10.1016/0924-
2244(94)90070-1 
8. Luby-Phelps K. Cytoarchitecture and Physical Properties of Cytoplasm: Volume, Viscosity, Diffusion, 
Intracellular Surface Area. International Review of Cytology. Published online 1999:189-221. 
doi:10.1016/s0074-7696(08)60527-6 

Page | 10 
 
9. Maintz L, Novak N. Histamine and histamine intolerance. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2007;85(5):1185-1196. doi:10.1093/ajcn/85.5.1185 
10. Metcalfe DD, Baram D, Mekori YA. Mast cells. Physiological Reviews. 1997;77(4):1033-1079. 
doi:10.1152/physrev.1997.77.4.1033 
11. Nout MJR. Food Technologies: Fermentation. Encyclopedia of Food Safety. Published online 2014:168-
177. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-378612-8.00270-5 
12. Rodriguez MBR, Carneiro C da S, Feijó MB da S, Júnior CAC, Mano SB. Bioactive Amines: Aspects of Quality 
and Safety in Food. Food and Nutrition Sciences. 2014;05(02):138-146. doi:10.4236/fns.2014.52018 
13. Ruiz-Capillas C, Herrero A. Impact of Biogenic Amines on Food Quality and Safety. Foods. 2019;8(2):62. 
doi:10.3390/foods8020062 
14. Taban BM, Dogan Halkman HB, Halkman AK. MICROFLORA OF THE INTESTINE | Biology of the 
Enterococcus spp. Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology. Published online 2014:652-657. doi:10.1016/b978-
0-12-384730-0.00211-1 
15. Editor: Adriana Farah. Coffee. Consumption and Health Implications. Royal Society Of Chemistry; 
2019:548-556. 
16. European Food Safety Authority. Scientific Opinion on risk based control of biogenic amine formation in 
fermented foods. EFSA Journal. 2011;9(10):2393. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2011.2393 
17. Lee K, Choi YI, Im S-T, et al. Riboflavin Inhibits Histamine-Dependent Itch by Modulating Transient 
Receptor Potential Vanilloid 1 (TRPV1). Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience. 2021;14. 
doi:10.3389/fnmol.2021.643483 
18. Reinhart R. https://scanews.coffee/video/reco-2019/ric-rhinehart-on-the-coffee-price-crisis-the-role-and-
responsibility-of-specialty-coffee-reco-2019/ 
19. Oliveira SD, Franca AS, Glória MBA, Borges MLA. The effect of roasting on the presence of bioactive 
amines in coffees of different qualities. Food Chem. 2005, 90, 287−291. 
