Research article
Dietary supplementation with decaffeinated
green coffee improves diet-induced insulin
resistance and brain energy metabolism
in mice
Lap Ho1, Merina Varghese1, Jun Wang1, Wei Zhao1, Fei Chen1,
Lindsay Alexis Knable1, Mario Ferruzzi2, Giulio M. Pasinetti1,3,4,5
1Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA, 2Departments of Food Science
and Foods & Nutrition, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, 3Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA, 4Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, NY, USA, 5Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, James J. Peters Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA
Objectives: There is accumulating evidence that coffee consumption may reduce risk for type 2 diabetes, a
known risk factor for Alzheimer’s and other neurological diseases. Coffee consumption is also associated
with reduced risk for Alzheimer’s disease and non-Alzheimer’s dementias. However, preventive and
therapeutic development of coffee is complicated by the cardiovascular side effects of caffeine intake. As
coffee is also a rich source of chlorogenic acids and many bioactive compounds other than caffeine, we
hypothesized that decaffeinated coffee drinks may exert beneficial effects on the brain.
Methods: We have investigated whether dietary supplementation with a standardized decaffeinated green
coffee preparation, Svetol®, might modulate diet-induced insulin resistance and brain energy metabolism
dysfunction in a high-fat diet mouse model.
Results: As expected, dietary supplementation with Svetol® significantly attenuated the development of high-
fat diet-induced deficits in glucose-tolerance response. We have also found that Svetol® treatment improved
brain mitochondrial energy metabolism as determined by oxygen consumption rate. Consistent with this
evidence, follow-up gene expression profiling with Agilent whole-genome microarray revealed that the
decaffeinated coffee treatment modulated a number of genes in the brain that are implicated in cellular
energy metabolism.
Discussion: Our evidence is the first demonstration that dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green
coffee preparation may beneficially influence the brain, in particular promoting brain energy metabolic processes.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, Dementia, Mitochondria, Chlorogenic acid, Coffee
Introduction
There is accumulating evidence that coffee consump-
tion may provide health benefits. For example, coffee
epidemiological studies suggest coffee consumption
is associated with reduced risks for several common
age-related illnesses.1,2
In a meta-analysis of 23 studies between 1996 and
2009, Huxley et al.1 found an approximately 25% lower
risk for type 2 diabetes among people who consumed
three to four cups of coffee per day compared with
people who consumed two cups of coffee per day or
those who do not drink coffee. In another meta-analysis,
Barranco-Quintana et al.2 identified an approximately
28%lowerriskforAlzheimer’sdiseaseamongcoffeecon-
sumers compared with non-consumers. Keeping in mind
that type 2 diabetes is a key risk factor for Alzheimer’s
dementia, it is possible that the benefit of coffee con-
sumption in Alzheimer’s disease might reflect the protec-
tive effects of coffee consumption on type 2 diabetes,
Alzheimer’s disease mechanisms, normal cognitive func-
tions, and/or a combination of these activities. That
coffee consumption may protect against cognitive
decline is revealed by a recent study showing that moder-
ate consumption of three to five cups of coffee per day is
Correspondence to: Giulio Maria Pasinetti, Department of Neurology,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Annenberg Building, Room 20-06,
1468 Madison Avenue (at 100 Street), New York, NY 10029, USA.
Email: giulio.pasinetti@mssm.edu
© W.S. Maney & Son Ltd 2012
DOI 10.1179/1476830511Y.0000000027
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
37

associated with a lower risk for cognitive decline unre-
lated to Alzheimer’s disease.3
As a result of increasing evidence that coffee
consumption
may
directly
or
indirectly
benefit
Alzheimer’s disease dementia, there is a great interest
in utilizing coffee or related dietary products as part
of
a
preventive
and
therapeutic
application
in
Alzheimer’s disease. However, coffee consumption is
also associated with cardiovascular health risks such
as elevated blood cholesterol and blood pressure
which lead to increased risk for heart disease, stroke,
and premature death.4,5 Moreover, caffeine in coffee
has been implicated as the primary component respon-
sible for these negative effects of coffee consumption
on cardiovascular functions.5
Apart from caffeine, coffee is a rich source of bio-
active compounds such as chlorogenic acids that may
provide health benefits. For example, Huxley et al.1
reported that daily consumption of three to four
cups of decaffeinated coffee that contains high con-
tents of chlorogenic acids significantly reduced the
risk for type 2 diabetes by 30%.
In the view of evidence that non-caffeinated coffee
components may benefit metabolic processes and of
evidence suggesting the contribution of progressively
impaired glucose energy metabolism in the brain to
cognitive dysfunction in aging6 and to neurodegenerative
disorders, we explore the potential beneficial impact
of non-caffeinated coffee components on diet-induced
insulin resistance and brain energy metabolism.
Materials and methods
Svetol® decaffeinated green coffee extract
Svetol® is a commercially available green, unroasted
decaffeinated coffee extract. The supply of Svetol®
for our study is generously supplied by Naturex
(Avignon, France). As shown in Table 1, Svetol® con-
tains about 40–45% chlorogenic acids from which
5-caffeoylquinic acid represents about 15%.
Animals and dietary conditions
Adult female mice (C57B6SJL strain) were randomly
assigned to one of the following four dietary regimens
(10 per group): (1) a high-fat diet, (2) a high-fat diet +
Svetol®, (3) a normal diet, and (4) a normal diet +
Svetol®. The high fat diet we used in this study is
known to induce resistance (caloric composition 60%
fat, 20% carbohydrate, and 20% protein), whereas
the normal diet is a standard laboratory diet (10%
fat, 70% carbohydrate, and 20% protein).7 The two
diets contain equal percentages of cholesterol per
gram and both diets were purchased from Research
Diet, Inc. (New Brunswick, NJ, USA). Svetol® was
delivered through the drinking water; mice assigned
to Svetol® treatment groups were provided with drink-
ing water containing 0.6 g/l Svetol® and mice assigned
to non-Svetol treatment groups were provided with
normal, unadulterated drinking water. All animals
had ad libitum access to food and water. High-fat
diet and/or Svetol® treatments were initiated at
approximately 3 months of age and continued until 8
months of age. Thereafter, mice were anesthetized
with the general anesthetic ketamine HCl and xylazine
(Fort Dodge Animal Health) and killed by decapi-
tation. Each of the freshly harvested brain specimens
(minus the cerebellum and the olfactory cortex) was
hemi-dissected: one hemisphere was used for the iso-
lation of the mitochondria for metabolic studies and
the other hemisphere was rapidly frozen, pulverized
in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C for subsequent
biochemistry. All animal studies were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Assessment of metabolic changes in the
periphery and in the brain
Intra-peritoneal glucose-tolerance test
We used the intra-peritoneal glucose-tolerance test
(IGTT) to measure changes in circulating glucose
levels in response to a glucose load challenge as an
index of peripheral metabolic function. As we have
described previously,7 the IGTT was conducted by
administering individual mice with a single postpran-
dial intra-peritoneal dose of glucose (2 g/kg body
weight (BW)). Blood samples were collected from
tail–vein periodically over 2 hours and blood glucose
contents were assessed using the OneTouch LifeScan
System (LifeScan, Milpita, CA, USA) following the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Assessment of brain mitochondrial metabolism
We measured metabolic activities of mitochondria iso-
lated from the brain as an index of cellular metabolic
functions in the brain. Crude mitochondrial fractions,
containing both free and synaptosomal mitochondria,
were prepared from freshly isolated brain specimens
(excluding the cerebellum and the olfactory lobe)
essentially as described by Clark and Nicklas.8 In
brief, tissue specimens were homogenized in Sucrose-
Tris-EGTA (STE) buffer (250 mM sucrose, 5 mM
Tris,
2 mM
Ethylene
Glycol
Tetraacetic
Acid
(EGTA), pH 7.4, with 0.2% fatty acid-free bovine
Table 1
Svetol® composition
Svetol® component
Percent
Total polyphenol
50–55
Chlorogenic acids
40–45
5-Caffeoylquinic acid
10–15
Caffeine
0–2
Cafestol, kahweol
0
According to http://www.nova-drink.com and http://www.
naturex.com.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
38

serum albumin (BSA)) and centrifuged at 1000 × g for
5 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and
then centrifuged at 12 000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C to
pellet the mitochondria. The mitochondrial pellets
were washed twice in STE buffer without BSA.
Protein contents of the mitochondrial preparations
were estimated using the method of Bradford.
Mitochondrial metabolic activity was assessed by
measurements of oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in
freshly isolated mitochondrial preparations using the
Seahorse XF24 extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse
Bioscience, North Billerica, MA), which facilitates
analysis of respiration in microgram levels of mito-
chondrial preparations in a multi-well format as
described previously.9 In brief, freshly isolated mito-
chondria were re-suspended in a mitochondrial assay
solution (70 mM sucrose, 220 mM mannitol, 5 mM
KH2PO4, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM hydroxyethyl piperazi-
neethanesulfonic acid, 1 mM EGTA, 0.2% fatty acid-
free BSA, pH 7.4 using KOH). The mitochondria
were then attached to multi-well plates (XF24V7
plates) by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 10 minutes
at 4°C. Substrates for mitochondrial electronic trans-
port chain (ETC) complex I (10 mM each of pyruvate
and malate) or complex II (10 mM succinate, with
2 μM rotenone to inhibit complex I) were added.
Metabolic activities of mitochondria in the presence
of substrates for mitochondrial ETC complex I
(10 mM each of pyruvate and malate) or complex II
(10 mM succinate, with 2 μM rotenone to inhibit
complex I) were assessed using the Seahorse XF24
extracellular flux analyzer, which measured from
each well of attached mitochondria OCR values corre-
sponding to select indices of mitochondrial activities
in the following sequential order: basal respiration,
state 3 respiration, state 4 respiration, maximal respir-
ation, and ETC complex IV respiration. Finally, we
also
measured
non-mitochondrial
background
oxygen consumption. We used 10 μg of mitochondrial
protein per well for all OCR measurements in the pres-
ence of complex I substrate and for measurements of
complex IV respiration. We used 5 μg of mitochondrial
protein per well for the measurement of OCR in the
presence of complex II substrates. Measurements of
basal and maximal mitochondrial OCR are reflections
of, respectively, basal and maximal mitochondrial res-
piratory activity. Maximal OCR was measured by
addition
of
p-trifluoromethoxy
carbonyl
cyanide
phenyl hydrazone (FCCP), which uncouples mito-
chondrial oxygen consumption from phosphorylation.
State 3 OCR was indicative of mitochondrial adeno-
sine-5′-triphosphate turnover and was measured in
the presence of adenosine diphosphate (ADP), the
substrate for phosphorylation by complex V of the
ETC. State 4 OCR was a measure of proton leakage
across the mitochondrial inner membrane and was
assessed in the presence of oligomycin, which inhibits
complex V. ETC complex IV OCR was indicative of
complex IV activity and was assessed in the presence
of the artificial electron donor for complex IV, N, N,
N′,
N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine
(TMPD),
which was reduced using ascorbate. Finally, measure-
ments of mitochondrial OCR in the presence of ETC
complex I, II, or IV substrates were designed to help
identify potential changes in specific steps of the mito-
chondrial ETC after high-fat diet and/or Svetol®
treatment. For OCR measurements in the presence
of complex I (or complex II) substrates, assay plates
were loaded with mitochondrial protein and the sub-
strates were added 10 minutes before the start of the
assay. All OCR measurements were conducted and
monitored at 37°C using a Seahorse XF24 extracellu-
lar flux analyzer, which is preprogrammed for the fol-
lowing sequential steps: equilibrating the attached
mitochondria with specific complex I or II substrates,
followed by two cycles of 30 seconds mix (mixing the
mitochondrial assay solution for 30 seconds) and basal
respiration measurement for 4 minutes; one cycle of a
15 seconds mix, injection of 5 mM ADP, 15 seconds,
mix and 6 minutes measure for state 3 respiration; a
cycle of 15 seconds mix, injection of 2 μM oligomycin,
15 seconds mix, and 3 minutes measure for state 4 res-
piration; one loop of 15 seconds mix, injection of 4 μM
FCCP, 15 seconds mix, and 3 minutes measure for
maximal respiration and a final loop of 15 seconds
mix, injection of a mixture of 50 mM ascorbate,
0.5 mM TMPD, 2 μM rotenone, and 4 μM antimycin
to measure complex IV respiration or 4 μM antimycin
to measure non-mitochondrial oxygen consumption,
15 seconds mix and 2 minutes measure. All data
were expressed as picomole O2 consumed per minute.
Gene expression analysis
Brain RNA samples were amplified and labeled using
the
Agilent
Quick
Amp
Labeling
Kit
(Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and hybridized to
Agilent whole-genome oligo microarray in Agilent’s
SureHyb Hybridization Chambers. After hybridiz-
ation and washing, the processed slides were scanned
using
the
Agilent
DNA
microarray
scanner
(G2505B) following the Agilent Technologies’ guide-
lines. Array data were analyzed by analysis of variance
(ANOVA) (with Benjamini–Hochberg false-discovery
rate correction)10 and then in pairwise comparisons
independent t-tests and fold change, followed by the
application of false-discovery rate corrections10 for
multi-sampling errors.
Results
We induced type 2 diabetes in C57B6SJL mice by
feeding the animals a high-fat diet in which 60% of
the calories are derived from fats.7 We then explored
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
39

the metabolic impact of treating animals with a decaf-
feinated green coffee preparation, Svetol® (Naturex,
Avignon, France), which contains high levels of
chlorogenic acids (≥45%) and low levels of caffeine
(≤2%). Mice were divided into four treatment groups:
(1) normal diet, (2) high fat diet, (3) Svetol®, and (4)
high-fat diet + Svetol®. Treatments were initiated at 3
months of age and continued untill 8 months of age. In
our studies, Svetol® was provided by incorporating
it into the drinking water, providing 80 mg/kg BW
per day.
As shown in Fig. 1A, animals in all experimental
groups consumed comparable amounts of the respect-
ive diets. In comparison to control animals under
normal diet, high-fat diet treatment led to significant
elevation of BW (Fig. 1B) and elevated plasma
glucose
under
a
glucose-tolerance
challenge
(Fig. 1C). Dietary supplementation with Svetol®
had no detectable effect on BW, either under the
context of normal diet or high-fat diet treatment
(Fig. 1B). As expected, the high-fat diet in our studies
induced insulin resistance; when challenged with a
glucose-tolerance test, high-fat diet-treated animals
showed
impaired
glucose
clearance
(Fig.
1C).
Supplementation with Svetol® attenuated high-fat
diet-mediated insulin resistance, reflected by improving
glucose clearance in response to a glucose-tolerance
test challenge (Fig. 1C; comparing high-fat diet vs.
high-fat diet + Svetol® groups).
On the basis of our evidence that Svetol® sup-
plementation
beneficially
modulated
metabolic
responses in the periphery, we explored whether
Svetol® may also benefit energy metabolism in the
brain. We prepared mitochondria from the mouse
brains used in our study: half of the brain (excluding
the cerebellum and the olfactory lobe) from each
animal was isolated and the mitochondria were pre-
pared from these tissues by differential centrifugation.
Protein content of the mitochondrial preparations was
estimated using Bradford assay. Equal contents of
total mitochondrial protein from each preparation
was used for the assessment of mitochondrial OCR.
With the aid of a Seahorse XF24 extracellular flux
analyzer, we assessed OCR by the mitochondrial
ETC as an index of cellular energy metabolism. The
Seahorse analyzer is designed to facilitate analyses of
respiration in microgram content of mitochondrial
preparations in a multi-well format. In isolated mito-
chondria, basal respiration is assayed in the presence
of the specific substrates for ETC complex I (pyruvate
and malate), complex II (succinate, with rotenone to
inhibit complex I), and complex IV (ascorbate and tet-
ramethylphenylenediamine, with rotenone and anti-
mycin to inhibit complexes I and II, respectively).
Figure 1
Body weight, food consumption, and glucose-tolerance assay. Mice were maintained on normal diet (Ctl), normal diet
treated with Svetol® (SV) and on a high fat diet (Hifat) with or without SV co-treatment. (A) Food consumption over 20 week
treatment period. (B) Changes in body weight (grams) during the treatment period. Statistical analysis: ANOVA with repeated
measures: Ctl vs. SV: not significant; Ctl vs. Hifat, P < 0.0001; Ctrl vs. Hifat + SV, P < 0.0001; SV vs. HiFat, P < 0.0001; SV vs. HiFat +
SV, P < 0.001; HiFat vs. Hifat + SV, not significant. (C) Glucose-tolerance assay performed at week 14 of treatment. Statistical
analysis: ANOVA with repeated measures: Ctrl vs. SV, not significant; Ctrl vs. Hifat, P < 0.015; Ctrl vs. HiFat + SV, not significant;
SV vs. HiFat, P < 0.001; Ctrl + SV vs. Hifat + SV, P < 0.005; HiFat vs. HiFat + SV, not significant.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
40

State 3 respiration is induced in the presence of ADP,
which acts as the substrate for phosphorylation at
complex V and state 4 respiration by the addition of
oligomycin, which inhibits complex V. Maximal
respiration is induced by addition of FCCP, which
uncouples mitochondrial oxygen consumption from
phosphorylation. A representative outcome of a
Seahorse study is shown in Fig. 2, which depicts
assessments of basal respiration, state 3 respiration,
and maximal respiration in the mitochondria isolated
from the brain specimens of a control and a high-fat
diet-treated mouse.
We observed that, in brain mitochondria, a high-fat
diet induced a reduction in state 3 respiration at
complex I, which was reversed by treatment with
Svetol® (Fig. 3A). Svetol® treatment increased both
state 3 and maximal respiration at complex II as com-
pared with the control group (Fig. 3B). When com-
pared with the high-fat diet group, Svetol® treatment
improved
maximal
respiration
at
complexes
I
(Fig. 3A) and II (Fig. 3B) in animals co-treated with
Svetol® and the high-fat diet. There was no change
in maximal respiration at complex IV by any of the
treatments (Fig. 3C).
We next explored for genes that might be involved in
mediating the effects of the high-fat diet and Svetol® in
the brain. Using an Agilent whole-genome microarray
platform, we searched for genes that are differentially
expressed in the brain of non-treated control animals
maintained on a standard rodent diet compared with
control animals treated with a high-fat diet, treated
with Svetol®, or treated with a high-fat diet +
Svetol®.
Identification
of
differentially
regulated
genes from the microarray data was conducted using
ANOVA and pairwise comparison statistics, with the
additional application of the Benjamini–Hochberg
false-discovery rate correction10 to reduce false posi-
tives. Based on statistical analysis of the microarray
Figure 2
Representative mitochondrial respiration
measurement data using Seahorse XF24 extracellular flux
analyzer. R + A + T + A: rotenone, antimycin, ascorbate, and
tetramethyl-phenylenediamine.
Figure 3
OCR in isolated brain mitochondria. Mitochondria were isolated from the brain of mice on normal diet (Ctl), normal diet
treated with chlorogenic acid (CA) and on high-fat diet (HiFat) with or without CA treatment. The experiment was designed to
measure basal OCR, 5 mM ADP-stimulated state 3 respiration and maximal respiration induced by FCCP. (A) Respiration in
presence of complex I substrates (10 mM pyruvate and malate). (B) Respiration with complex II substrate, 10 mM succinate.
(C) Respiration at complex IV (assayed in presence of 50 mM ascorbate + 0.5 mM tetramethyl-phenylenediamine). Data are
expressed as mean ± SEM, n = 5. *P < 0.05 compared with control and #P < 0.05 compared with the high-fat group by two-tailed
t-test.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
41

data, we identified 604 genes that are differentially
regulated
in
brain
specimens
from
high-fat
vs.
control mice, and/or Svetol® vs. control mice by
>1.5-fold (for ANOVA, false-discovery rate corrected
P < 0.001; for pairwise comparisons, false-discovery
rate corrected P < 0.01). In an unsupervised clustering
analysis using the 604 genes, we were able to segregate
animals from the four treatment groups with 100%
accuracy (Fig. 4). Consistent with our studies on
brain mitochondrial OCR, our microarray evidence
suggests that dietary treatments with the high-fat diet
and/or Svetol® may modulate cellular activities in
the brain. Ongoing studies in our laboratory are
using independent real time polymerase chain reaction
studies to characterize the impact of the high-fat diet
treatment and/or Svetol® treatment on the regulation
of these genes in the brain.
Among these 604 differentially regulated genes we
identified (Fig. 4), we found some genes that are
involved in glucose metabolism, insulin-signaling
pathway, mitochondrial ETC, mitochondrial tran-
scription initiation, and lipid metabolism (Table 2).
These genes may contribute to high-fat diet-induced
glucose-tolerance impairment and/or impaired mito-
chondrial function that were restored after Svetol®
treatment.
To better understand whether these differentially
regulated genes synergistically modulate different bio-
logical functions, we searched for interacting partners
of these differentially regulated genes using the Protein
Interaction Network Analysis platform (http://csbi.
ltdk.helsinki.fi/pina/interactome.batchForm.do). We
identified six common interacting proteins that inter-
act with two or more of the differentially regulated
genes we found (Fig. 5). These interacting proteins
are PIK3R1 (phosphoinositide-3-kinase, regulatory
subunit 1 (alpha)), EGFR (epidermal growth factor
receptor), TNFRSF1B (tumor necrosis factor receptor
superfamily, member 1B), CALM1 (calmodulin),
HRAS (v-Ha-ras Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene
homolog),
and
SCNA
(alpha
synuclein).
Interestingly, PIK3R1 is a part of the insulin-signaling
pathway and genetic variabilities in the PIK3R1 gene
may contribute to risk for Alzheimer’s disease.11 Thus,
consistent with our mitochondrial studies and gene
expression profile analysis, observations that PIK3R1
interacts with the differentially regulated genes that
we have identified further supports the idea that
Svetol treatment may modulate insulin signaling pro-
cesses in the brain.
Discussion
Consistent with evidence that consumption of decaffei-
nated coffee reduces the risk for type 2 diabetes,1 our
studies show that treatment with a decaffeinated
green coffee preparation attenuated the insulin-resist-
ant phenotype in a high-fat diet model of insulin resist-
ance. We provided the first evidence that dietary
supplementation with this decaffeinated green coffee
preparation may beneficially modulate mitochondrial
energy metabolism in the brain. This evidence is corro-
borated by our gene expression profile studies demon-
strating
that
Svetol®
treatment
modulated
the
expression of genes in the brain that are involved in
glucose metabolism, insulin-signaling pathway, mito-
chondrial transcription initiation, and lipid metab-
olism. Collectively, our evidence suggests that dietary
supplementation with the decaffeinated green coffee
preparation may beneficially influence the brain, in
part by promoting brain energy metabolic processes.
Figure 4
Hierarchical clustering of differentially regulated
genes. RNA expression of brain specimens were analyzed
using the Agilent whole-genome oligo microarray platform.
Gene expression data were analyzed by ANOVA (with
Benjamini–Hochberg false-discovery rate correction10) and
then in pairwise comparisons of the high-fat (Hifat) vs. the
normal control (Ctl) diet in the presence or absence of
Svetol® (SV) treatment by independent t-tests and fold
change. We identified 604 genes that are differentially
regulated in brain specimens from Hifat vs. Ctl and/or from
SV vs. Ctl (for ANOVA analysis, false-discovery rate corrected
P < 0.001; for pairwise comparisons, false-discovery rate
corrected P < 0.01 with fold change >1.5). Gene signal (in
Log2 values) for the 604 differentially regulated genes were
subjected to unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis
using the UPGMA algorithm with cosine correlation as the
similarity metric. Results are present as a heat map, which
highlight group changes in gene expression in response to
the Hifat diet, the impact of SV treatment on modulating HiFat
diet-induced gene expression changes, and the impact of SV
treatment on gene expression in animals maintained on the
control diet.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
42

Svetol® is a dietary supplement manufactured by
Naturex, with a recommended dose of 400 mg (two
capsules)/day in humans (http://www.swansonvita
mins.com/SWD060/ItemDetail). Dellalibera et al.12
reported that dietary supplementation with 400 mg/
day of Svetol® in overweight participants led to signifi-
cant BW loss and improvements in the body lean-to-
fat mass ratio.12 In our preclinical studies, we treated
mice with 80 mg/kg BW per day of Svetol®. Using a
Food
and
Drug
Administration
recommended
Figure 5
Interaction network of selected differentially regulated genes. Candidate proteins (green) were used as a query
to search a protein interaction database the Protein Interaction Network Analysis platform (http://csbi.ltdk.helsinki.fi/pina/
interactome.batchForm.do). Identified interacting partners are shown in blue. Common interacting proteins that interact with
two or more query proteins are shown in yellow.
Table 2
List of differentially expressed genes involved in metabolism
Function
Gene name
Gene description
Glucose metabolism
G6pd2
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 2
Ogg1
8-Oxoguanine DNA-glycosylase 1
Gfod1
Glucose-fructose oxidoreductase domain containing 1
Glp1r
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor
Dera
2-Deoxyribose-5-phosphate aldolase homolog (C. elegans)
Fpgt
Fructose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase
Insulin signaling
Calm3
Calmodulin 3
Araf
v-Raf murine sarcoma 3611 viral oncogene homolog
Pik3cd
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic delta polypeptide
Tnf
Tumor necrosis factor
Mitochondrial/oxidative
phosphorylation
Tfb2m
Transcription factor B2, mitochondrial
Adh4
Alcohol dehydrogenase 4 (class II), pi polypeptide
Cox7c
Cytochrome c oxidase, subunit VIIc
Ndufa8
NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex, 8
Cbr1
Carbonyl reductase 1
Blvrb
Biliverdin reductase B (flavin reductase (NADPH))
Cryzl1
Crystallin, zeta (quinone reductase)-like 1
Dbt
Dihydrolipoamide branched chain transacylase E2
Lipid metabolism
Pla2g3
Phospholipase A2, group III
Plce1
Phospholipase C, epsilon 1
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
43

formulation for converting drug doses from animal
studies to equivalent human drug doses,13 we calcu-
lated that this mouse dose we used is equivalent to a
human dose of 430 mg/day Svetol®. The results
from our preclinical studies, together with the clinical
studies by Dellalibera et al.,12 support the potential
health
benefits
of
dietary
supplementation
with
Svetol® at the recommended dose of 400 mg/day.
The Svetol® decaffeinated green coffee preparation is
highly enriched in chlorogenic acids (Table 1). Evidence
suggests that chlorogenic acids may benefit glucose
homeostasis by interfering with glucose absorption
and/or
by
reducing
hepatic
glucose
output.14,15
Indeed, these potential impacts of chlorogenic acids on
glucose homeostasis have been proposed as the mechan-
isms underlying the efficacy of Svetol® to reduce BW in
overweight individuals.12 Interestingly, in our preclinical
studies using a dose of Svetol® equivalent to that used in
the clinical studies with overweight participants,12 we
found no detectable BW reduction in normal weight
mice after long-term dietary supplementation with
Svetol®. Our observation raises an interesting possibility
that Svetol® might have a different effect on BW in lean
vs. obese individuals. BW and energy homeostasis are
modulated by complex interplays between genetic, phys-
iological, and behavioral mechanisms involved in regu-
lating energy intake and energy expenditure.15–19
Additional
studies
will
be
necessary
to
confirm
whether dietary supplementation with Svetol® does
not affect BW in normal weight humans, and to clarify
the mechanisms by which Svetol® might reduce BW
among over weight, but not among lean, individuals.
Chlorogenic acid components from Svetol® may
exert additional physiological benefits aside from mod-
ulating glucose homeostasis. There is evidence that
chlorogenic acids may promote glucagon-like peptide-
1 secretion that ultimately may promote insulin sensi-
tivity.20 In addition, chlorogenic acids are potent
antioxidants.21
Moreover,
in vitro studies suggest
chlorogenic acids may protect against hydrogen per-
oxide-induced neurotoxicity22 and promotes neurite
outgrowth.23 This evidence, in conjunction with obser-
vations from this study that Svetol® treatment improves
metabolic processes in the brain, suggests dietary sup-
plementation with a decaffeinated coffee preparation
may benefit the brain through a combination of mul-
tiple mechanisms. Additional studies are necessary to
identify the beneficial bioactive coffee component(s)
from coffee, and to clarify their mechanisms of action.
Multiple studies have demonstrated that many
chlorogenic acids from coffee are bioavailable in
human peripheral compartments.24–28 More relevant
to our studies with Svetol®, Farah et al.26 demonstrated
plasma bioavailability for a number of chlorogenic
acids, including 3-caffeylquinic acid, 4-caffeylquinic
acid, 5-caffeylquinic acid, 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid,
3,5-dicaffeoylquinic
acid,
and
4,5-dicaffeoylquinic
acid, in humans after oral consumption of 400 mg/kg
Svetol®, a dose that is equivalent to the application of
80 mg/kg BW in our preclinical studies. There is no
published information on the bioavailabilty of dietary
chlorogenic acids in the brain. In a bioavailability
study, we orally administrated an acute dose of
250 mg/kg BW Svetol® to rats and observed significant
accumulations of multiple chlorogenic acids in perfused
rat brain specimens (Ferruzzi et al., in preparation).
Ongoing studies are continuing to investigate individ-
ual brain-targeted chlorogenic acids from Svetol® for
their potential benefits in the brain.
Our studies demonstrate the beneficial effects of a
decaffeinated green coffee preparation on energy
metabolic dysfunction in the brain in response to
type 2 diabetes. As cognitive decline correlates well
with impaired energy metabolism of the brain, these
studies also support continuing the development of
decaffeinated coffee preparations for the prevention
and treatment of neurodegenerative disorders associ-
ated with impaired cognition.
References
1 Huxley R, Lee CM, Barzi F, Timmermeister L, Czernichow S,
Perkovic V, et al. Coffee, decaffeinated coffee, and tea consump-
tion in relation to incident type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2009;169(22):
2053–63.
2 Barranco Quintana JL, Allam MF, Serrano Del Castillo A,
Fernández-Crehuet Navajas R. Alzheimer’s disease and coffee:
a quantitative review. Neurol Res 2007;29(1):91–5.
3 Eskelinen MH, Ngandu T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto
M. Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the risk of late-life
dementia: a population-based CAIDE study. J Alzheimers Dis
2009;16(1):85–91.
4 van Dam RM. Coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab
2008;33(6):1269–83.
5 Cornelis MC, El-Sohemy A. Coffee, caffeine, and coronary heart
disease. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2007;10(6):745–51.
6 Kapogiannis D, Mattson MP. Disrupted energy metabolism and
neuronal circuit dysfunction in cognitive impairment and
Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol 2011;10(2):187–98.
7 Ho L, Qin W, Pompl PN, Xiang Z, Wang J, Zhao Z, Peng Y,
et al. Diet-induced insulin resistance promotes amyloidosis in a
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J
2004;18(7):902–4.
8 Clark JB, Nicklas WJ. The metabolism of rat brain mitochon-
dria. Preparation and characterization. J Biol Chem 1970;
245(18):4724–31.
9 Varghese M, Zhao W, Wang J, Cheng A, Qian X, Chaudhry A,
et al. Mitochondrial bioenergetics is defective in presymptomatic
Tg2576 AD mice. Transl Neurosci 2011;2(1):1–5.
10 Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc
B (Methodolgical) 1995;57(1):289–300.
11 Liolitsa D, Powell J, Lovestone S. Genetic variability in the
insulin signalling pathway may contribute to the risk of late
onset Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2002;73(3):261–6.
12 Dellalibera O, Lemaire B, Lafay S. Svetol®, green coffee
extract, induces weight loss and increases the lean to fat mass
ratio in volunteers with overweight problem. Phytothérapie
2006;4:1–4.
13 United States Department of Agriculture and Health and
Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005;
2005.
Available
from:
http://www.health.gov/DIETARY
GUIDELINES/dga2005/document/pdf/DGA2005.Pdf.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
44

14 McCarty MF. A chlorogenic acid-induced increase in GLP-1
production may mediate the impact of heavy coffee consumption
on diabetes risk. Med Hypotheses 2005;64(4):848–53.
15 Tunnicliffe JM, Shearer J. Coffee, glucose homeostasis, and
insulin resistance: physiological mechanisms and mediators.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2008;33(6):1290–300.
16 Jéquier E, Tappy L. Regulation of body weight in humans.
Physiol Rev 1999;79(2):451–80.
17 Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL. The physiology of body weight regu-
lation: relevance to the etiology of obesity in children. Pediatrics
1998; 101:525–39.
18 Morton GJ, Cummings DE, Baskin DG, Barsh GS, Schwartz
MW. Central nervous system control of food intake and body
weight. Nature 2006;443:289–95.
19 Lardy H, Shrago E. Biochemical aspects of obesity. Annu Rev
Biochem 1990;59:689–710.
20 Johnston KL, Clifford MN, Morgan LM. Coffee acutely mod-
ifies gastrointestinal hormone secretion and glucose tolerance
in humans: glycemic effects of chlorogenic acid and caffeine.
Am J Clin Nutr 2003;78(4):728–33.
21 Wang
Y,
Ho
CT.
Polyphenolic
chemistry
of
tea
and
coffee: a century of progress. J Agric Food Chem 2009;57(18):
8109–14.
22 Chu YF, Brown PH, Lyle BJ, Chen Y, Black RM, Williams CE,
et al. Roasted coffees high in lipophilic antioxidants and chloro-
genic acid lactones are more neuroprotective than green coffees.
J Agric Food Chem 2009;57(20):9801–8.
23 Ito H, Sun XL, Watanabe M, Okamoto M, Hatano T.
Chlorogenic acid and its metabolite m-coumaric acid evoke
neurite
outgrowth
in
hippocampal
neuronal
cells.
Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 2008;72(3):885–8.
24 Duarte GS, Farah A. Effect of simultaneous consumption of milk
and coffee on chlorogenic acids’ bioavailability in humans.
J Agric Food Chem 2011;59(14):7925–31. Epub 2011 Jun 15.
25 Ferruzzi MG. The influence of beverage composition on delivery
of phenolic compounds from coffee and tea. Physiol Behav 2010;
100(1):33–41. Epub 2010 Feb 6.
26 Farah A, Monteiro M, Donangelo CM, Lafay S. Chlorogenic
acids from green coffee extract are highly bioavailable in
humans. J Nutr 2008;138(12):2309–15.
27 Monteiro M, Farah A, Perrone D, Trugo LC, Donangelo C.
Chlorogenic acid compounds from coffee are differentiallyabsorbed
and metabolized in humans. J Nutr 2007;137(10):2196–201.
28 Nardini M, Cirillo E, Natella F, Scaccini C. Absorption of phe-
nolic acids in humans after coffee consumption. J Agric Food
Chem 2002;50(20):5735–41.
Ho et al.
Dietary supplementation with a decaffeinated green coffee preparation
Nutritional Neuroscience
2012
VOL. 15
NO. 1
45

Copyright of Nutritional Neuroscience is the property of Maney Publishing and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
