Intercontinental Exchange® (ICE®) became the center of global trading in 
“soft” commodities with its acquisition of the New York Board of Trade 
(NYBOT) in 2007. Now known as ICE Futures U.S.®, the exchange offers 
futures and options on futures on soft commodities including cotton, 
cocoa, frozen concentrated orange juice, sugar and Coffee “C,” a contract 
based on Arabica (as opposed to Robusta) coffee.
Coffee futures have traded in New York since 1882, first on the New York Cocoa Exchange (later part of the Coffee, 
Cocoa and Sugar Exchange), then on the New York Board of Trade and now on ICE Futures U.S. Options on coffee 
futures were introduced in 1986. Futures and options on futures are used by both the domestic and global coffee 
industries to price and hedge transactions. The ICE Futures U.S. Coffee “C” contract is the benchmark for world 
coffee prices. The contract’s depth, liquidity and volatility, along with its diversifying properties vis-à-vis other 
commonly traded futures, have made it a preferred instrument among commodity trading advisors and hedge 
funds. ICE Futures U.S. is the exclusive global market for Coffee “C” futures and options.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF COFFEE
The coffee tree is named after the Ethiopian province of Kaffa, where 
legend has it a goat herder noticed his goats seemed livelier than 
usual after chewing the local trees’ red “cherries.” Whether true or 
not, we know two facts today: first, the roasted beans, two of which 
are found in every coffee cherry, produce a flavorful and aromatic 
drink. Second, an alkaloid contained in those beans, caffeine, is a 
stimulant that arguably has done more to advance the cause of 
human productivity than all management seminars combined. 
(Green coffee beans can be decaffeinated prior to roasting.)
Coffee moved across the Red Sea to the Yemeni port of Mocha. The 
trees, which are not freeze-hardy, were smuggled into the Netherlands 
in the early 17th century, and were taken to India and to the Dutch 
East Indies. “Java,” the name of an Indonesian island, remains one 
of coffee’s nicknames. The French brought coffee to the Caribbean, 
and the Dutch to their South American colony of Surinam, where it 
was moved by land to Brazil. The large-scale commercialization of 
the East and later West African coffee industries occurred at the 
height of European colonialism on the continent in the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries. Robusta and Arabica coffees are produced 
by two botanically different trees. Arabica, which is more labor-
intensive in its cultivation and is grown at higher altitudes, produces 
a milder, more aromatic and more complex coffee than Robusta. 
Coffees made from the hardier Robusta tree have higher caffeine 
content and a stronger taste.
COFFEE AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Almost no coffee is grown in or exported from Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, and 
these countries dominate the import picture. Unlike other soft 
commodities such as sugar, cotton and frozen concentrated orange 
Coffee ‘C’

Coffee ‘C’
2
juice, the issue of subsidization of coffee production and exports is 
absent from international trade forums. This makes the global coffee 
trade and the stabilization of global coffee prices one of the most 
enduring issues in international economics.
A U.S. Department of Agriculture analysis of Arabica coffee exports 
and imports is shown below. The income and wealth disparities 
between coffee importing nations and exporting nations are 
substantial. While coffee imports and prices are a minor matter 
for the large coffee-importing countries, they can be critical for 
major coffee-exporting countries. Recognition of this imbalance of 
importance and interests, along with a number of Cold War political 
considerations, prompted the formation of the International Coffee 
Organization in 1963. The ICO has administered six International 
Coffee Agreements designed to promote a sustainable world 
coffee economy. ICO member countries account for over 97% of 
world coffee production and approximately 80% of world coffee 
consumption.
2011-2012 USDA ARABICA COFFEE EXPORT ESTIMATES
(1,000 60-Kilogram Bags)
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture
2011-2012 USDA ARABICA COFFEE IMPORT ESTIMATES
(1,000 60-Kilogram Bags)
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture
The price of coffee has been extraordinarily volatile over the years, 
both in current- and constant-dollar terms. It is subject to supply 
disruptions such as freezes in the Brazilian highlands, and to new 
exporters buying market share via lower prices, as was the case for 
Vietnam in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The intraday volatility 
of coffee “C” futures is just as high, which has made the contract a 
favorite for day-traders over the years.
PRICE OF COFFEE “C” HIGHLY VOLATILE
Source: CRB-Infotech CD-ROM
INTERMARKET ARBITRAGE
Any consumer knows coffee is not coffee; there are many grades 
and varieties. Still, traders can and do trade one coffee future 
against another. Two common trades are the spread between the 
ICE Futures U.S. Coffee “C” contract and the Brazilian Bolsa de 
Mercadorias & Futuros (BMF) International Arabica contract and the 
spread between Coffee “C” and the London International Financial 
Futures (LIFFE) Robusta contract.
THE NEW YORK - SÃO PAULO ARBITRAGE
(Long ICE July 2012, Short BMF September 2012)
Source: Bloomberg
BRAZIL 
25,930
VIETNAM 
19,000
COLOMBIA 
7,500
INDONESIA 
5,750
HONDURAS 
3,925
GUATEMALA 
3,700
PERU 
3,700
INDIA 
2,900
UGANDA 
2,000
OTHER 
14,041
ETHOPIA 
2,800
EU-27 
43,000
U.S. 
21,500
JAPAN 
5,800
SWITZERLAND 2,300
ALGERIA 
2,025
CANADA 
2,000
KOREA 
2,000
RUSSIA 
1,700
MALAYSIA 
1,000
OTHER 
8,320
AUSTRALIA 
1,125

Coffee ‘C’
3
THE NEW YORK - LONDON ARBITRAGE
(Long ICE March 2012, Short LIFFE May 2012)
Source: Bloomberg
The deep, liquid cash market for coffee, price volatility and the 
critical need for risk management by coffee exporters and roasters 
has created a highly successful futures contract, as demonstrated by 
its volume history.
LONG-TERM SUCCESS OF COFFEE “C” CONTRACT
Source: CRB-Infotech CD-ROM
ICE FUTURES U.S. COFFEE “C” CONTRACT
The ICE Futures U.S. Coffee “C” futures contract is delivered 
physically. The key specifications are:
Contract specifications including fees, margins and
delivery standards
Options on Coffee “C” futures contracts are also available. Each 
futures contract has options that settle into that contract along with 
serial options for the months between the delivery month and the 
previous delivery month. For example, December futures underlie 
option contracts expiring in October and November as well as 
December. Option strikes are spaced 2.5 cents apart. The last trading 
day for regular options is the second Friday of the calendar month 
preceding the option contract month, provided there are a minimum 
of four trading days between the last trading day of the expiring 
option and the first notice day of the expiring future. 
Options trading volume on the Coffee “C” futures contract has 
grown significantly since the late 1990s. Options tend to be used 
by two groups of sophisticated traders. The first is commercial 
participants hedging their physical positions. The second is 
experienced speculative traders. The growing use of these markets 
by both groups is an important indicator of the Coffee “C” futures 
contract’s success.
TRADING ICE FUTURES U.S. COFFEE “C” FUTURES AND OPTIONS
Futures markets exist for the purposes of price discovery and risk 
transfer. Price discovery requires buyers and sellers to meet in a 
competitive marketplace; prices resulting from each transaction 
signal to other traders what a given commodity might be worth.
Anyone approved by a clearing member or futures commission 
merchant can participate in the price discovery process, regardless 
of their participation in the coffee business. A market participant who 
is not in the coffee business will be classified as a non-commercial or 
speculative trader. A market participant active in the coffee business 
will be classified as a commercial trader or hedging trader. For a 
speculator, the price discovery trade is simple and straightforward; 
if you believe the price of Coffee “C” will rise, you “go long” a futures 
contract; if you believe the price of Coffee “C” will fall, you “go short” 
a futures contract.
These same market views can be expressed in options as well. If 
you believe prices will rise, you can buy a call option, sell a put 
option or engage in a large number of spread trades tailored to your 
specific price view and risk acceptance. If you believe prices will fall, 
you can buy a put option, sell a call option or engage in a different 
set of spread trades. A long call (put) option is the right, but not 
the obligation, to go long (short) the underlying future at the strike 
price at or by expiration. A short call (put) option is the obligation to 
deliver (take delivery) of the underlying future at or by the expiration 
if that option is exercised.

Coffee ‘C’
4
AVERAGE DAILY TRADING VOLUME BY MONTH: COFFEE “C” OPTIONS
Source: ICE Futures U.S.
AVERAGE MONTHLY OPEN INTEREST: COFFEE “C” OPTIONS
Source: ICE Futures U.S.
Hedgers use ICE Coffee “C” options frequently. producers can set a 
floor beneath a selling price with long put options, and buyers can 
establish a ceiling over costs with long call options, among other 
strategies.
In a futures trade, you and the counterparty to your trade will post 
initial or original margin with your futures commission merchant or 
clearing member. Minimum margins are set by ICE Futures U.S., and 
your futures commission merchant may require additional funds.
Margin schedule
There are no margin requirements for long option positions. Margin 
requirements for short option positions vary according to the 
relationship between the option strike price and the futures price.
If the market moves in your favor — higher for a long position (or 
commitment to take delivery of coffee or to offset the contract 
by selling it prior to delivery), or lower for a short position (or 
commitment to deliver coffee or to offset the contract by buying 
it prior to delivery) — the equity in your account will increase. You 
may withdraw these funds down to the “maintenance margin” level, 
depending on your account agreement.
If the market moves adversely — lower for a long position or higher 
for a short position — your futures commission merchant will require 
you to post additional funds, called variation margin, to sustain your 
maintenance margin level. These “margin calls” assure both your 
futures commission merchant and ICE Clear U.S.®, the exchange 
clearing house, that you can perform according to your contractual 
commitment. All futures accounts are marked-to-market daily, and 
participants deficient in margin obligations may have positions 
liquidated involuntarily.
As the designated clearing house, ICE Clear U.S. serves as the 
counterparty to every futures contract traded on ICE Futures U.S. 
The clearing house clears trades matched by ICE Futures U.S. and 
guarantees performance in delivery even if a trader defaults. 
What do the financial flows look like in a futures trade? Let’s say a 
five-contract futures position is initiated at 215.75¢ per pound and 
the market rises to 218.30¢ per pound on the following trading day.
• For the long position, the gain is:
5 contracts x [218.30 – 215.75]/contract x $18.75 per .05¢ = $4,781.25
• For the short position, the loss is equal and opposite:
5 contracts x [215.75 – 218.30]/contract x $18.75 per .05¢ = -$4,781.25
If we reverse the price path, we reverse the gains and losses. Let’s 
change the starting price to 246.10¢ per pound and have the market 
decline to 243.40¢ per pound the next day.
• For the long position, the loss is:
5 contracts x [243.40 – 246.10]/contract x $18.75 per .05¢ = -$5,062.50
• For the short position, the gain is equal and opposite:
5 contracts x [246.10 – 243.40]/contract x $18.75 per .05¢ = $5,062.50
Options traders see the same directional profit and loss profiles 
relative to price, but the actual profit and loss is subject to a range 
of additional factors, including market volatility, time to expiration, 
interest rates and the relationship between the current futures price 
and the option’s strike price.
RISK TRANSFER
Risk transfer is the second purpose of a futures market. Any 
originating seller or marketer of Arabica coffee, any holder of 
Arabica coffee inventories, or any party at risk if the price of coffee 

Coffee ‘C’
5
declines is long the market. These participants are long the market 
and can offset risk by going short a Coffee “C” futures contract. Any 
Arabica coffee roaster, or anyone who is at risk of increasing Arabica 
coffee prices, is short the market and can offset risk by going long a 
Coffee “C” futures contract.
The mechanics and financial flows are identical to those outlined 
above. An Arabica coffee grower at risk to prices falling can acquire a 
financial asset, the short Coffee “C” futures position, which will rise in 
value as the market declines. The opposite is true for a coffee roaster 
at risk to prices rising; there a long Coffee “C” futures position will 
rise in value as the market rises.
While the financial flows should offset the economic gains and 
losses of the physical coffee position, there are two important things 
to remember. First, even though futures prices converge to cash 
prices at expiration, the convergence process is subject to what is 
called “basis risk” or differences resulting from changes in hedging 
demand, location of the coffee or grade differentials.
Daily report of Coffee “C” stocks in warehouses
Second, while the economic gains on, for example, a warehouse full 
of Arabica coffee are real, they are not realized until the Arabica 
coffee is sold. If this inventory is hedged with a short futures position 
and the market rises, the beneficial owner of the Arabica coffee will 
have to keep posting additional funds in the margin account.
Nothing in the above discussion of hedging tells you when or at 
what price to hedge. This is one of the reasons options are valuable 
to hedgers. While the Arabica coffee grower may wish to have 
downside protection, or a price floor, that same grower probably 
wants to participate in any future price increases. The grower 
concerned about a decline in the value of Arabica coffee between 
now and the time he expects to be able to sell his cash crop at 
harvest in the fourth quarter could buy a December 215¢ put option, 
which is the right, but not the obligation, to receive a short position 
in a December Coffee “C” future at 215¢ for a premium of 8.27¢, or 
approximately $3,101 per contract. The purchased put guarantees 
the grower the right to sell the December Coffee “C” future for an 
effective price of 206.73¢ per pound (the 215¢ strike price less the 
premium paid of 8.27¢). This right gives him protection if Coffee “C” 
prices have fallen by the expiry of the December option, but at the 
same time preserves his ability to profit should the price of Arabica 
coffee move higher over the period.
The Arabica coffee roaster wishing to cap the price of Arabica 
coffee, but not be exposed to margin calls if the price continues to 
rise, can do an opposite trade and buy a December 220¢ call option, 
which is the right, but not the obligation, to receive a long position 
in a December Coffee “C” future at 220¢ for a premium of 6.93¢, or 
approximately $2,599 per contract.
The purchased call gives the Arabica coffee roaster the right to buy 
the December Coffee “C” future at an effective price of 226.93¢ per 
pound (again, the strike price of 220¢ cents plus the premium paid 
of 6.93¢), offering protection against an unfavorable rise in the price 
of Arabica coffee, while preserving the ability to take advantage if 
prices decline.
It should be noted that the risk profile for sellers of options is 
dramatically different than for buyers of options. For buyers, the risk 
of an option is limited to the premium or purchase price paid to 
buy the option. For sellers, the risk profile is unknown and can be 
potentially quite large.
Options can become complex very quickly, with trading influenced 
by variables including time remaining to contract expiration, 
underlying commodity volatility, short-term interest rates and a 
range of expected movements collectively called “the Greeks.”

Coffee ‘C’
6
GLOBAL MARKETS IN CLEAR VIEW®
ICE delivers fast, secure trade technology and risk management solutions through a customer-driven, innovation-focused culture.
IntercontinentalExchange (NYSE: ICE) is a leading operator of regulated futures exchanges and over-the-counter markets for agricultural, 
credit, currency, emissions, energy and equity index contracts. ICE Futures Europe hosts trade in half of the world’s crude and refined oil 
futures. ICE Futures U.S. and ICE Futures Canada list agricultural, currencies and Russell Index markets. ICE is also a leading operator of central 
clearing services for the futures and over-the-counter markets, with five regulated clearing houses across North America and Europe. ICE 
serves customers in more than 70 countries: theice.com/about
This brochure serves as an overview of the Coffee “C” futures and options markets of ICE Futures U.S. Examples and descriptions are designed to foster a better understanding of the Coffee “C” futures and 
options market. The examples and descriptions are not intended to serve as investment advice and cannot be the basis for any claim. While every effort has been made to ensure accuracy of the content, 
ICE Futures U.S. does not guarantee its accuracy, or completeness or that any particular trading result can be achieved. ICE Futures U.S. cannot be held liable for errors or omissions in the content of the 
brochure. Futures and options trading involves risk and is not suitable for everyone. Trading on ICE Futures U.S. is governed by specific rules and regulations set forth by the Exchange. These rules are 
subject to change. For more detailed information and specifications on any of the products traded on ICE Futures U.S., contact ICE Futures U.S. or a licensed broker.
©2012 IntercontinentalExchange, Inc. IntercontinentalExchange, ICE Block, ICE mobile and WebICE are Registered Trademark of IntercontinentalExchange, Inc., registered in the European Union and the 
United States. ICE, ICE Clear, ICE Clear Canada, ICE Clear Europe, ICE Clear US, ICE Futures, ICE Futures Canada, ICE Futures Europe, ICE Futures U.S. ICE OTC and ICEMaker are Registered Trademarks 
and Marques Deposees of IntercontinentalExchange, Inc., registered in Canada, the European Union, Singapore and the United States. Global Markets in Clear View is a Registered Trademark and Marques 
Deposees of IntercontinentalExchange, Inc., registered in Canada, the European Union and the United States. Natural Gas Intelligence is a Registered Trademark of IntercontinentalExchange, Inc., registered 
in the United States. Coffee “C”, Cotton No.2, and Sugar No.11 are Registered Trademark and Marques Deposees of ICE Futures U.S., Inc., registered in Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, Singapore 
and the United States. USDX is a Registered Trademark and Marques Deposees of ICE Futures U.S., Inc., registered in Canada, the European Union, Hong Kong, Japan and the United States. U.S. Dollar Index 
is a Registered Trademark of ICE Futures U.S., Inc., registered in the United States. Russell 1000 and Russell 2000 are Registered Trademarks of the Frank Russell Company. U.S. All other trademarks are 
properties of their respective owners. For more information regarding registered trademarks owned by IntercontinentalExchange, Inc. and/or its affiliated companies see: theice.com/terms
TRADING & TECHNOLOGY
ICE’s electronic trading tools, high-speed connectivity and mobility 
options provide unparalleled speed and flexibility for executing risk 
management strategies. > Learn More
ICE mobile®
Mobile market access for WebICE users via iPhone, Android and 
Blackberry. > Learn More
WebICE®
Available via an internet browser,  WebICE offers powerful trading 
tools and direct access to ICE Futures and OTC markets.
> Learn More
TRANSPARENT, REGULATED MARKETS
ICE Futures U.S. is a CFTC-regulated designated contract markets 
and ICE Clear U.S. is a CFTC-regulated designated clearing 
organizations. > Learn More
CONTACT US
Telephone:	 +1 212 748 4000
Online:	
theice.com/coffee
TRAINING FOR SUCCESS 
ICE offers training and educational classes as well as on demand 
resources to suit all levels of market expertise. > Learn More
