Impact of caffeine and coffee on our health
Elvira Gonzalez de Mejia1 and Marco Vinicio Ramirez-Mares2
1 University of Illinois, Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Division of Nutritional Sciences, 228 ERML, 1201W.
Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
2 Institute of Natural Resources, University of the Sea, Puerto A´ ngel, Oaxaca CP 70902, Mexico
Coffee is the most frequently consumed caffeine-con-
taining beverage. The caffeine in coffee is a bioactive
compound with stimulatory effects on the central ner-
vous system and a positive effect on long-term memory.
Although coffee consumption has been historically
linked to adverse health effects, new research indicates
that coffee consumption may be beneﬁcial. Here we
discuss the impact of coffee and caffeine on health
and bring attention to the changing caffeine landscape
that includes new caffeine-containing energy drinks and
supplements, often targeting children and adolescents.
Caffeine and coffee consumption
Caffeine is the most routinely ingested bioactive substance
throughout the world. It is a natural alkaloid found in more
than 60 plants including coffee beans, tea leaves, cola nuts,
and cocoa pods. Its concentration varies depending on the
type of product, agronomic and environmental factors, and
processing. 
Common 
beverages 
containing 
variable
amounts of caffeine include coffee (the major dietary con-
tributor), tea, soft drinks, energy drinks, chocolate pro-
ducts, certain medications (headache treatments and
painkillers), dietary supplements, and over-the-counter
stimulants. Americans daily drink more than 400 million
cups of coffee, which is the major source of caffeine in the
adult diet, compared with tea and caffeinated soft drinks in
children and adolescents [1].
Caffeine as part of a blend of compounds in coffee
Coffee is a complex beverage containing, besides caffeine,
more than 1000 compounds responsible for its pleasant
ﬂavor and aroma. The ﬁnal sensory properties of a freshly
prepared cup of coffee are the result of a long chain of
chemical transformations that occur from the coffee bean
to the coffee cup. Among the many bioactive compounds
present in coffee are methylxanthines (caffeine, theobro-
mine, theophylline) diterpene alcohols (cafestol, kahweol),
chlorogenic 
acids 
(caffeoylquinic 
acids, 
feruloylquinic
acids, p-coumaroylquinic acids), ﬂavonoids (catechins,
anthocyanins), hydroxycinnamic acids (ferulic acid, caffeic
acid, p-coumaric acid), tocopherols, and melanoidins. Caf-
feine concentration and the biological activity of coffee
depend on a blend of factors, such as variations in raw
materials (species, origin, and genetic traits), agricultural
practices (traditional or organic), post-harvest techniques
(wet or dry), duration and conditions of storage, roasting
degree (light, medium, or dark), kind of roasting process
(standard or torrefacto), type of commercial coffee (roasted
ground or instant), and grinding and brewing method
(boiled, ﬁltered, or espresso). This means that we never
drink two cups of coffee with the same chemical composi-
tion, even when the coffee comes from the same outlet [2].
A snapshot of caffeine concentration in foods
Caffeine concentration varies among different food pro-
ducts, with coffee having in general the highest concentra-
tion compared with tea, soft drinks, energy drinks, shot
drinks, and solid foods. A signiﬁcant variation in caffeine
concentration exists within a beverage category; most
energy drinks contain mainly caffeine, due to its desired
stimulatory effect on the central nervous system, and
taurine because of its physiological function of enhancing
endurance performance and to aid in the reduction of lactic
acid build-up after exercise [3]. Chocolate and other cocoa-
containing foods, sweets, and snacks contribute small
amounts of caffeine to the diet. Table 1 outlines selected
products that are available in the market and their caffeine
concentrations. Box 1 summarizes facts related to caffein-
ated beverage (CB) consumption and caffeine intake in the
USA.
The good, the bad, and the ugly of caffeine and coffee
consumption
Debate persists about whether coffee consumption is ben-
eﬁcial or detrimental for human health [4]. Epidemiologi-
cal data support the view that habitual coffee consumption
has several health beneﬁts, including lower risks of Par-
kinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, a favorable effect on liver
function, a possible role in weight loss (increased metabolic
rate, energy expenditure, lipid oxidation, and lipolytic and
thermogenic activities), and a decreased risk of developing
certain cancers (endometrial, prostatic, colorectal, liver)
[5,6]. Several studies have demonstrated that coffee con-
sumption has a signiﬁcant association with decreased risk
of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and that every additional cup of
coffee is associated with a 7% reduction in disease risk.
However, other studies have shown that caffeine alone
causes deterioration of glucose tolerance. Because similar
results are seen for decaffeinated and regular coffee, this
means that, although caffeinated coffee may induce an
increased glycemic response, other bioactive compounds
present in coffee, such as chlorogenic acids, other phenolic
compounds, magnesium, and trigonelline, may counteract
this effect by altering glucose absorption, liver glucose
Science & Society
1043-2760/
 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2014.07.003
Corresponding author: Mejia, E.G.d. (edemejia@illinois.edu).
Keywords: caffeine; coffee; energy drinks.
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism, October 2014, Vol. 25, No. 10 
489

metabolism, incretin release, and insulin sensitivity [5,6].
Moreover, the effect of coffee on cardiovascular health is an
ongoing controversy; coffee consumption was shown to
have adverse effects on serum cholesterol, blood pressure,
and plasma homocysteine. However, the effects of coffee on
epinephrine concentrations, hyperglycemia, and blood
pressure all appear to be weaker than the effects of the
same amount of caffeine used in isolation. The harmful
cardiovascular effects of caffeine may be offset by the
beneﬁcial effects of other compounds in coffee on the
biological pathways involved in the development of coro-
nary heart disease [5,6]. The available evidence on T2D
and cardiovascular effects related to habitual coffee con-
sumption is largely reassuring.
In addition, there is no signiﬁcant relationship between
coffee consumption and gastric ulcer, duodenal ulcer, re-
ﬂux esophagitis, or non-erosive reﬂux disease. Coffee in-
take has been inversely associated with mortality, with the
lowest risk among individuals who chronically consume
about two to four cups per day. Among healthy adults a
moderate daily caffeine intake of 400 mg is not associated
with adverse effects [5–8].
By contrast, coffee intake has been associated with
bone loss, lower bone density or fractures (heavy coffee
consumers), and increased blood pressure. Available evi-
dence suggests that pregnant women must restrict their
caffeine intake due to an increased risk of poor fetal
growth and spontaneous abortion with daily ingestion
of 300 mg [5,8].
Excessive caffeine intake has been associated with
headaches, nausea, anxiety, hypertension, and restless-
ness. The amount of caffeine required to produce adverse
effects varies from person to person depending on weight,
sex, age, and differences in susceptibility. Most consumers
experience, and enjoy, increased alertness, improved mood
and focus, and the capacity to remain awake. For others,
caffeine can have disagreeable symptoms; some people
metabolize caffeine more slowly than others due to vari-
ability in the enzymatic activity of the metabolizing en-
zyme CYP1A2 (Figure 1). Caffeine also has addictive
properties, with persistent desire to consume caffeine-con-
taining foods or drinks and withdrawal symptoms (head-
ache, lethargy, and irritability) when caffeine ingestion is
abruptly discontinued [6]. Caffeine also enhances memory
consolidation [9].
Caffeine’s impact on children and adolescents
Children (2–12 years) and adolescents (13–17 years) me-
tabolize caffeine more rapidly than adults. Children in
general consume less caffeine (24–37 mg/day) than adults
[10,11]. Children and adolescents, including those diag-
nosed as hyperactive, are no more sensitive to the effects of
caffeine than adults. The more caffeine youngsters con-
sume, the less sleep they get, which plays a critical role in
learning; this may eventually lead to other health pro-
blems [10]. Children ingest caffeine mostly in the form of
tea and carbonated soft drinks [11], which should be
avoided, particularly because it is unknown how excessive
caffeine intake impacts the developing brain. Among ado-
lescents the consumption of sweetened coffee and energy
drinks has increased; these are the principal sources of
Table 1. Caffeine content of selected beverages and foods
Product 
Serving
size (ﬂ. oz)
Caffeine in one
serving (mg)
Coffee
Regular drip or percolated
8 
95–330
Brewed or percolated, decaffeinated
8 
3–12
Instant, prepared from powder
8 
30–70
Espresso
1 
50–150
Tea
Black, regular, brewed or tea bag
8 
40–74
Black, decaffeinated
8 
2–5
Green, brewed or tea bag
8 
25–50
Oolong, brewed or tea bag
8 
21–64
White, brewed or tea bag
8 
15
Instant, prepared from powder
6 
33–64
Yerba mate, brewed or tea bag
8 
65–130
Iced tea
12 
27–42
Beverages
Carbonated beverages with
caffeine added
12 
22–69
Alcoholic beverages with
caffeine added
1 
3–9
Energy drinks with caffeine added
8.2–23.5 
33–400
Caffeinated waters
16.9–20.0 
42–125
Foods
Chocolates
8 oz 
0–6
Sweets
Various 
1–122
Snacks, from US Department of
Agriculture database
1 oz or 1 bar 
3–41
Snacks, gums, and mints
Various 
20–400
Fast foods
Various 
1–49
Adapted from the 2012 USFDA report on caffeinated food and CBs [Somogyi,
L.P. (2012) Caffeine Intake in the U.S. Population (http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
AboutFDA/CentersOfﬁces/OfﬁceofFoods/CFSAN/CFSANFOIAElectronicReadin-
gRoom/UCM333191.pdf)].
Box 1. Coffee history and consumption
A taste of history
The name coffee was derived from the Arabic word quahweh and,
in Latin, coffea for the botanical genus [12]. The history of coffee
begins in Ethiopia, where it was discovered in about 850 AD.
Cultivation of coffee bushes was dominated by Yemen and there is
evidence of coffee drinking by the middle of the 15th century. It
disseminated into India, Northern Africa, Turkey, and Balkans.
Coffee was introduced from Mocha (Yemen) to Europe by Venetian
merchants in early 1615. By the end of the 17th century, the use of
coffee in Europe was common and from there it was subsequently
introduced to America [13]. Among the 103 species of coffee
identified, only two, Coffea arabica (arabica) and Coffea canephora
(robusta), produce 99% of the coffee consumed. Coffee is now
grown in 60 tropical and subtropical countries. About 60% of the
coffee produced worldwide comes from the American continent,
where arabica coffee (low bitterness and low caffeine content) is
predominant.
CB consumption and caffeine intake in the USA [11]
 85% of Americans consume at least one CB per day.
 Among all consumers of CBs, the mean caffeine intake is 165 mg/day.
 The highest caffeine intake occurs in consumers aged 50–64 years
(226 mg/day).
 Coffee is the primary source of caffeine in all age groups.
 Carbonated soft drinks and tea are the major contributors to
caffeine intake in <18-year-olds.
 Consumers of energy drinks represent 10% across all age groups.
Science & Society
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 
October 2014, Vol. 25, No. 10
490

caffeine intake (83.2 mg/day) but are below current sug-
gested maximal levels for adolescents (2.5 mg/kg body
weight/day or 100–175 mg/day depending on body weight
40–70 kg) [11]. The ingestion of energy drinks with alcohol
has become dangerously popular among adolescents. Caf-
feine in energy drinks may mask the drowsiness associated
with alcohol intake, which may increase the potential for
alcohol-related injury. People with heart problems should
be especially cautious about mixing caffeine and alcohol;
both compounds act to increase heart rate and taken
together can result in cardiac arrhythmias. Moreover,
some people may have increased sensitivity to the various
ingredients (taurine, glucuronolactone, ginseng, ginkgo
biloba, green-tea extract) in energy drinks and thus may
have an acute physiological response, speciﬁcally an in-
crease in blood pressure and heart rate [10].
A happy ending
A daily intake of three to four 8-oz cups of brewed coffee
(a total of 400 mg/day of caffeine) or ﬁve servings of
caffeinated soft drinks or tea may be considered a moderate
amount (110–345 mg/day) for most adults and appears to
be associated with a neutral to potentially beneﬁcial effect
on health. Children (6–12 years) can consume 45–85 mg/
day and adolescents 100–175 mg/day [11]. People with
dyslipidemia may consider brewed or ﬁltered coffee to
avoid cafestol and kahweol; these are the main cholester-
ol-raising compounds in coffee and are partly retained by
ﬁlters, but are conserved on boiling ground beans. For
those who are at risk of developing osteoporosis, adding
two tablespoons of milk can offset the amount of calcium
lost from consuming one cup of coffee. The recommenda-
tion for women trying to become pregnant is to limit their
ingestion of caffeine to <300 mg/day. People with high
blood pressure or irregular heart rhythms should also limit
caffeine.
In conclusion, a growing body of evidence from epidemi-
ological studies suggests that coffee drinking in most peo-
ple is beneﬁcial and inversely associated with risk for
various diseases. However, because association does not
Caﬀeine (CA)
General circulaon
CA
CA
CA
T1/2 (↑) preterm neonates, pregnancy, oral
contracepves, medicaon, or liver disease
T1/2 (↓) cigaree smoking or medicaon
T1/2 = 3-7 h
CA + Proteins↔ CA-Proteins
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
CA
Brain
Mouth
Esophagus
Stomach
100% absorpon
30-45 min
Small intesne
Large
intesne
Rectum
Anus
Fetus
Amnioc ﬂuid
Urine
excreon
Kidney
Liver
CYP450 1A2
Theobromine (12%)
Paraxanthine (84%)
Theophylline (4%)
relaxes smooth
muscles
95-99%
Placenta
Reabsorpon
ClR = 0.078 L/h/kg
Acetylaon and
Oxidaon systems
Biotransformaon of CA
 
 matabolites
CA metabolites move into the blood stream
Dimethylxanthines, dimethyl and
monomethyl uric acids, trimethyl
and dimethylallantoin, uracil
derivaves and 1-5% of CA
Other organs
Blood-brain barrier
Breast
Milk
↑ Adenosine receptors (A1 and A2A ) blockage (↑ alertness)
↑ Dopamine system (↑ smulant eﬀect)
↑ Adrenaline (↑ alertness and energy)
↑ lipolysis
↑ urine volume
TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism 
Figure 1. Overview of the pharmacokinetics of caffeine in humans. After ingestion, caffeine is absorbed into the general circulation within 30–45 min, although
approximately 90% is cleared from the stomach within 20 min; peak plasma concentrations are reached within 1–1.5 h. The half-life (t1/2) varies widely among individuals
according to age (preterm neonates, 50–100 h), sex (20–30% shorter in females), use of oral contraceptives (increases 5–10 h), pregnancy (9–11 h), certain concurrent
medications (decreases with carbamazepine or rifampicin, increases with cimetidine or ciprofloxacin), cigarette smoking (1.5–3.5 h), and liver function (96 h). Caffeine is
promptly reabsorbed by the renal tubules and only 1–5% is excreted unchanged in urine within 48 h. Infants (8–9 months) excrete 85% in urine. The doses typically
contained in coffee, tea, and soft drinks can result in plasma levels of 20–40 mmol/l and caffeine can act as a competitive inhibitor of brain receptors, occupying adenosine
receptor sites and resulting in increased alertness. Caffeine is absorbed completely and is metabolized mainly by the CYP1A2 isozyme of the hepatic microsomal
cytochrome P450 system. Caffeine undergoes demethylation, resulting in paraxanthine, theobromine, and theophylline. Finally, caffeine metabolites are biotransformed by
microsomal enzymes to dimethylxanthines, dimethyl and monomethyl uric acids, trimethyl and dimethylallantoin, and uracil derivatives, which are filtered by the kidneys
and exit the body in the urine [12,14]. Abbreviations: CA, caffeine; ", increase; #, decrease; Prot., protein; ClR, total plasma clearance.
Science & Society
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 
October 2014, Vol. 25, No. 10
491

prove causation, randomized controlled studies are needed
to elucidate the relationship between caffeine consumption
and certain diseases and to analyze patterns of consump-
tion with respect to health outcomes. The adverse effects of
consumption of products containing caffeine by children
and adolescents are largely unknown because most re-
search has been on adults. While researchers work to ﬁll
the gaps in our knowledge, especially with respect to
energy drinks, we can take the position of the American
Academy of Pediatrics, which states that ‘there is no place
for the use of energy drinks in the diets of children and
adolescents’; this needs to be reiterated by parents, pedia-
tricians, politicians, schools, and coaches.
References
1 NCA (2012) National Coffee Drinking Trends 2012, National Coffee
Association
2 Rodrigues, 
N.P. 
and 
Bragagnolo, 
N. 
(2013) 
Identiﬁcation 
and
quantiﬁcation of bioactive compounds in coffee brews by HPLC–
DAD–MSn. J. Food Comp. Anal. 32, 105–115
3 Heckman, M.A. et al. (2010) Energy drinks: an assessment of their
market size, consumer demographics, ingredient proﬁle, functionality,
and regulations in the United States. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food
Safety 9, 303–317
4 ILSI (2002) Caffeine monograph. Food Chem. Toxicol. 40, 1229–1310
5 Cano-Marquina, A. et al. (2013) The impact of coffee on health.
Maturitas 75, 7–21
6 O’Keefe, J.H. et al. (2013) Effects of habitual coffee consumption on
cardiometabolic 
disease, 
cardiovascular 
health, 
and 
all-cause
mortality. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 62, 1043–1051
7 Shimamoto, T. et al. (2013) No association of coffee consumption with
gastric ulcer, duodenal ulcer, reﬂux esophagitis, and non-erosive reﬂux
disease: a cross-sectional study of 8,013 healthy subjects in Japan.
PLoS ONE 8, e65996
8 Bhatti, S.K. et al. (2013) Coffee and tea: perks for health and longevity?
Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 16, 688–697
9 Borota, D. et al. (2014) Post-study caffeine administration enhances
memory consolidation in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 201–203
10 Branum, A.M. et al. (2014) Trends in caffeine intake among U.S.
children and adolescents. Pediatrics 133, 386–393
11 Mitchell, D.C. et al. (2014) Beverage caffeine intakes in the U.S. Food
Chem. Toxicol. 63, 136–142
12 Heckman, M.A. et al. (2010) Caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) in
foods: a comprehensive review on consumption, functionality, safety,
and regulatory matters. J. Food Sci. 75, R77–R87
13 Fredholm, B.B. (2011) Notes on the history of caffeine use. In
Methylxanthines, 
Handbook 
of 
Experimental 
Pharmacology 
200
(Fredholm, B.B., ed.), pp. 1–9, Springer-Verlag
14 Gramza-Michałowska, A. (2014) Caffeine in tea Camellia sinensis –
content, absorption, beneﬁts and risks of consumption. J. Nutr. Health
Aging 18, 143–149
Science & Society
Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 
October 2014, Vol. 25, No. 10
492
