172
Journal of Research in Medical and Dental Science | Vol. 8 | Issue 4 | June 2020 
Journal of Research in Medical and Dental Science 
2020, Volume 8, Issue 4, Page No: 172-175
Copyright CC BY-NC 4.0 
Available Online at: www.jrmds.in  
eISSN No. 2347-2367: pISSN No. 2347-2545
Corresponding author: Senol Dane
e-mail: senol.dane@nileuniversity.edu.ng
Received: 14/07/2020
Accepted: 24/07/2020
INTRODUCTION
Coffee belongs to the family Rubiaceae, which 
is widely disseminated throughout the tropical 
regions of the world [1]. It is one of the most 
important agricultural products of world trade 
which is exceeded only by oil [2]. Several legends 
exist on the discovery of this plant [3]. Due to 
the high demand and increase of sales of coffee 
beverages worldwide, most coffee producing 
countries aim to obtain a good quality and 
safe product by applying food control systems 
side the production and trading chains [2]. 
However, some factors are out of control such 
as environmental condition and undesirable 
changes in coffee bean characteristics because of 
logistic infra-structures that lead to contamination 
of fungal in coffee beans [4]. The contamination can 
occur at different stages of growing, harvesting, 
processing, transport, and storage. The high 
density of this contaminant generally corresponds 
to poor cleaning practices or the use of unhygienic 
techniques in using of equipment [5].
Besides, fungal contamination could occur during 
transportation. Measurements of relative humidity 
in containers during shipping showed that 
condensation can occur and cause re-wetting of 
the beans [4]. Therefore, the aim of this study was 
to assess possible fungal pathogens contaminating 
some coffee powders marketed in Abuja, Nigeria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Samples collection areas
Ten varieties of Coffee Powder were collected 
from different locations of the Federal Capital 
Isolation and Identification of Fungal Pathogens Contaminating Some Coffee 
Powder Marketed in the City of Abuja
Namla Djadjiti1, Moubarak A Aziz1, Onyemata K Esther1, Senol Dane2*
1Department of Biology, Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences, Nile University of Nigeria, Abuja Nigeria 
2Department of Physiology, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, Nile University of 
Nigeria, Abuja, Nigeria
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Coffee is the most important commercial crop in the economy of many countries in the world. The processing of raw 
coffee bean to coffee powder is subject to various operations of contamination by microorganisms during growth, after harvesting 
(when the beans are de-hulled, washed and stored) and during storing. This study was conducted to isolate and identify the 
contaminating fungi in some coffee powder marketed in the city of Abuja. 
Materials and Methods: In this study, four different Coffee samples (Gorilla’s Coffee, Nescafe 3 in 1, Café Najjar and Alcafe) were 
examined for fungi growth using potato dextrose agar. 
Results: The samples were contaminated by two fungi Aspergillus fumigatus from Gorilla’s Coffee and Candida albicans from Café 
Najjar with their occurrence frequencies of 4.16%. 
Conclusion: The isolated species were environmental contaminants, indicating poor hygienic practices during postharvest 
handling and processing. Aspergillus fumigatus is a ubiquitous saprophytic mold that forms airborne spores (conidia). Therefore, 
strict Good manufacturing practice (GMP) and hygienic practices should be followed to reduce fungal contamination to ensure 
the products quality and safety.
Key words: Fungal pathogens, Coffee, Isolation, Identification
HOW TO CITE THIS ARTICLE: Namla Djadjiti, Moubarak A Aziz, Onyemata K Esther, Senol Dane, Isolation and Identification of Fungal Pathogens 
Contaminating Some Coffee Powder Marketed in the City of Abuja, J Res Med Dent Sci, 2020, 8 (4):172-175.

Senol Dane et al
J Res Med Dent Sci, 2020, 8 (4):172-175
173
Journal of Research in Medical and Dental Science | Vol. 8 | Issue 4 | June 2020 
Territory of Nigeria: Jabi Mall (904 ’35 °N 
7°25’30°E); Wuse Market (9.07° N, 7.46° E) 
Tipper Garage Market, Gwarimpa Estate (9°06’ 
33°N 7°24’ 08E); Kado Bimko Market (9°05’03N 
7°25’04E); Mabuchi Market (9,09° 33°N 7,44° E) 
and SAHAD Store Ltd (9,05°N 7,49°E) to isolate 
and identify fungal pathogens responsible 
for Commercial Coffee Powder. But only four 
samples of the collected Coffee Powder were 
randomly used for this experiment.
Methods
Total of Ten different coffee powder samples 
from various places were purchased across 
the local markets and generally in various 
settlement covering particularly Abuja with 
different brands. The samples were kept in sterile 
polyethylene bag during the transportation to 
the laboratory. All the samples were kept place 
till ready for use. The samples were classified 
into four categories (A) Gorilla’s Coffee, (B) 3 
in1 Coffee, (C) Café Najjar and (D) ALCAFE. Each 
sample was properly ready for analysis.
Agar preparation
Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) was used in this 
study and was prepared according to the 
manufacture’s guideline. Agar was added to 
allow the quick solidification of the media. 
Bacterial contamination was inhibited by adding 
500mg of tetracycline into 500 ml of the agar 
solution prior to autoclaving and pouring into 
Petri dishes.
Sterilization of agar
Media was placed in the autoclave to allow 
for homogenization and sterilization. Reliable 
sterilization 
with 
moist 
heat 
requires 
temperatures above that of boiling water. These 
temperatures which are high is achieved through 
the principle of steam under pressure done in 
an autoclave. The Steam under pressure in an 
autoclave is about 15min with the temperature 
of 121˚C. This steam in an autoclave can kill 
microorganism and their endospore in about 15 
minutes. The temperature of water in autoclave 
increase above the standard water boiling point 
because of the chemistry principle which suggests 
that increase in gas lead to increase in temperature.
Sterilization of working bench
The working area was sterilized using alcohol 
70° swap to prevent contamination.
Fill plates
The Petri dishes were labeled according to the 
Coffee sample that will be inoculated onto them 
and arranged on the working bench. The conical 
flask containing the autoclaved media was 
handled using a heat resistant glove and allow to 
cool handle with bare hand but not too cool to 
prevent solidification of media in the container. 
Then swirl without introduction bubbles before 
pouring into plates. The agar plates can solidify 
then turn upside down.
Chemicals
Sodium Chloride, Potato Dextrose Agar (TM 
MEDIA, India), Lacto phenol Cotton Blue reagent 
and Tetracycline were used.
Isolation of fungi
20 g of coffee powder sample was properly 
weighed and mixed with 100 mL of NaCl 
(Sodium Chloride) using beaker and allow to mix 
properly for about 2-3 min 1 ml of the mixture 
of suspension coffee was added to 9 mL of NaCl 
solution (MRD) 10-1 and mix using Vortex for 
1min. A serial dilution of 10-1; 10-2; 10-3; 10-4; 
10-5; 10-6; 10-7; 10-8 and 10-9 were respectably 
prepared. Each of the dilution 10-4; 10-5 and 
10-6 was separated on plate of Potato Dextrose 
Agar. A total of (24) Plates were incubated at 
30°C for 14 days and the colonies were observed 
macroscopically.
Identification of fungi
After 
incubation 
examination 
of 
culture 
was made. The fungal diversity present in 
the coffee samples was characterized and 
identified based on their morphological features 
under macroscope using a Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM).
RESULTS
Fungi isolates
Two contaminating fungi (Aspergillus fumigatus 
in Gorilla’s Coffee and Candida albicans in Café 
Najjar) were isolated and identified). However, 
no growth was observed in Alcafé Coffee and 
Nescafe 3 in 1. 
Aspergillus fumigatus appeared in a single 
petri dish of Agar containing Najjar Coffee and 
Candida albicans appeared in a single Petri dish 
of Agar inoculate by Gorilla’s Coffee. No growth 
was observed on the agar inoculated with Alcafé 

Senol Dane et al
J Res Med Dent Sci, 2020, 8 (4):172-175
174
Journal of Research in Medical and Dental Science | Vol. 8 | Issue 4 | June 2020 
Coffee plate and Nescafe 3 in 1 after 14 days; 
however, bacteria of the coliform species were 
observed (Table 1).
Therefore, in this study, we strongly believe that 
the pollution of the final coffee product may be as a 
result of poor personal hygiene, improper cleaning 
of storage (with uncontrolled temperature) of the 
final coffee products (coffee powders), preparation 
areas (kitchens or tea rooms) and unclean utensils 
(cups or glasses). Although, mishandling of raw and 
roasted coffee beans from the production factory 
could allow in fungal pathogens which, enhance 
the coffee contamination.
DISCUSSION
One of the fungi identified in this study is 
Aspergillus fumigatus which is among the most 
common fungi present in the environment, it 
can tolerate growth in different substrates and 
environmental conditions, and their complete 
elimination is difficult. Aspergillus was observed 
after the incubation of plated coffee sample from 
Gorillas coffee, which is in correlation with the 
result reported by Ayob, et al. [6]. Many studies 
revealed that Aspergillus species is a natural 
coffee contaminant and carried over from the 
field to storage. However, conidia or spore of 
Aspergillus is not heat resistant and usually 
destroyed by heat processes [7]. The heat stress 
contributed to the relatively rapid death of fungal 
spores [8]. Thus, the appearance of green colony 
of Aspergillus species in the coffee powders 
studied is a clear indication of air contamination. 
The contamination of this fungi in coffee products 
may be associated with insufficient heat treatment 
during roasting or after heat treatment, during 
packaging, storage, or transportation due to the 
unhygienic environments [9]. However, in this 
study, we strongly believe that the pollution of 
the final coffee product may be as a result of poor 
personal hygiene, improper cleaning of storage 
(with uncontrolled temperature) of the final 
coffee products (coffee powders), preparation 
areas (kitchens or tea rooms) and unclean utensils 
(cups or glasses). Although, mishandling of raw 
and roasted coffee beans from the production 
factory could allow in fungal pathogens which, 
enhance the coffee contamination. The presence 
of Aspergillus species confirms the widespread 
natural contamination of coffee with these fungi 
[10]. But the presence of Saccharomycetes was 
surprising as this group of fungi is not a common 
environmental contaminant. Candida albicans 
was also found in café Najjar (sample C) after 
incubation for 14days. Candida albicans are 
pathogenic fungi and are rarely found in edible 
food product but other beneficial fungi have 
been reported as seen in the research report 
by [11]. According to Yadav et al. [12], Candida 
albicans is normally a harmless commensal 
of human beings, but it can cause superficial 
infections of the mucosa (oral/vaginal thrush) 
in healthy individuals and (rarely) infections of 
the skin or nails. It can also become invasive, 
causing life-threatening systemic and bloodstream 
infections in immunocompromised hosts, where 
the mortality rate can be as high as 50 % [13]. It is 
the most common cause of serious fungal infection 
and is a common cause of nosocomial infections in 
hospitals [14]. Some strains have been recognized 
that are resistant to azoles or echinocandins, which 
are the first-line antifungals for treatment of C. 
albicans infections [15]. 
CONCLUSION
This study was based on the isolation and 
identification of fungal pathogens contaminating 
some Coffee Powder marketed in the city of 
Abuja. Coffee is one of the world's most popular 
beverages. Thanks to its high levels of antioxidants 
and beneficial nutrients, it also quite healthy. In 
this study two contaminating fungi were isolated 
and identified as follows: Aspergillus fumigatus 
at 25% which is a ubiquitous saprophytic mold 
that forms airborne spores (conidia). Humans 
inhale, on average, hundreds of these infectious 
propagules daily. The fungal pathogen Candida 
albicans at 25% which is a highly specialized 
inhabitant of warm-blooded animals (mammals 
and birds). It preferentially colonizes mucosal 
surfaces and the skin but can also invade deeper-
Coffee infected
Fungi isolated
Number isolated
Percentage of Contaminated Coffee
Gorilla’s Coffee
A. fumigatus
1
25%
Café Najjar
C. albicans
1
25%
Alcafé coffee
Negative
0
0
Nescafe 3 in 1
Negative
0
0
Table 1: Total fungal count in different coffee powder.

Senol Dane et al
J Res Med Dent Sci, 2020, 8 (4):172-175
175
Journal of Research in Medical and Dental Science | Vol. 8 | Issue 4 | June 2020 
lying tissues and cause systemic infections 
that are difficult to treat and frequently lethal. 
Therefore, strict Good manufacturing practice 
(GMP) and hygienic practices should be followed 
to reduce fungal contamination to ensure the 
products quality and safety.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Future studies need to be developed to understand 
how different roasting conditions contribute to 
reduce fungal pathogens contaminating coffee 
powders. Appropriate precaution measures should 
therefore be taken by farmers, Industries and 
coffee handlers during the harvesting, postharvest 
transportation, storage, and packaging of coffee to 
reduce the risk of contamination.
REFERENCES
1.	 Esquivel P, Jiménez VM. Functional properties of coffee 
and coffee by-products. Food Res Int 2012; 46:488-495. 
2.	 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i7833en.pdf
3.	 http://www.shazuli.com/ 
4.	 Noonim P, Mahakarnchanakul W, Nielsen KF, et al. 
Isolation, identification, and toxigenic potential of 
ochratoxin A producing Aspergillus species from coffee 
beans grown in two regions of Thailand. Int J Food 
Microbiol 2008; 128:197-202.
5.	 Alum AE, Urom SMOC, Ben Y, et al. Microbiological 
contamination of food: The mechanisms, impacts and 
prevention. Int J Scientific Technol Res 2016; 5:65-78.
6.	 Ayob MK. Fungal contamination of commercial coffee 
powder. Int Seminar Current Res Progress Sci Technol 
2014.
7.	 van den Brule T, Sherlin CL, Houbraken LJ, et al. Conidial 
heat resistance of various strains of the food spoilage 
fungus Paecilomyces variotii correlates with mean 
spore size, spore shape and size distribution. Food Res 
Int 2020.
8.	 Leong SL, Hocking AD, Scott ES. Effects of water 
activity and temperature on the survival of Aspergillus 
carbonarius spores in vitro. Lett Appl Microbiol 2006; 
42:326-330.
9.	 Kusumaningrum HD, Rasyidah MM. Prevalence of 
spoilage mold in coffee before and after brewing. Food 
Res 2019; 30:720-726.
10.	Batista LR, Chalfoun SM, Silva CF, et al. Ochratoxin A in 
coffee beans (Coffea arabica L.) processed by dry and 
wet methods. Food Control 2009; 20:784-790.
11.	Tam P, Gee K, Piechocinski M, et al. Candida glabrata, 
friend and foe. J Fungi 2015; 1:277-292. 
12.	Yadav NA. Candida albicans: A shape-changing, 
opportunistic 
pathogenic 
fungus 
of 
humans. 
Microbiology Society 2017; 1145-1147.
13.	Badiee P, Hashemizadeh Z. Opportunistic invasive 
fungal infections: Diagnosis and clinical management. 
Indian J Med Res 2014; 139:195-204. 
14.	Khan HA, Baig FK, Mehboob R. Nosocomial infections: 
Epidemiology, prevention, control and surveillance. 
Asian Pacific J Tropical Biomed 2017; 7:478-482. 
15.	Cowen LE, Sanglard D, Howard SJ, et al. Mechanisms 
of antifungal drug resistance. Cold Spring Harbor 
Perspectives Med 2015; 5:a019752.
