How to 
Avoid 
Roasting 
Defects
TECHNICAL PAPER

2
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
LORING SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
Roasting defects are a fact of 
life for anyone responsible for 
roasting coffee. The key to 
avoiding them is to understand 
the different types of roasting 
defects and what causes them 
in the first place. Your roasting 
style, and even your equipment, 
can make all the difference.
OVERVIEW

3
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
Roasting defects are flaws in roasted 
coffee that are caused by the amount 
of energy being applied during each 
phase of the roasting process as well 
as the types of heat application that 
are being favored. These defects can 
be categorized as either subjective or 
objective roasting defects. Subjective 
indicates it is at least somewhat 
dependent on the point of view (or taste) 
of the observer. Those categorized as 
objective are measurable and not often 
up for debate. We will review both types 
of roasting defects, including some 
of the most commonly encountered: 
scorching, facing, tipping, baking, over-
developed, and under-developed.
ROASTING 
DEFECTS 
DEFINED

4
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
Subjective Roasting Defects
These are defects that are often pointed to by 
roasters and professional coffee tasters as being 
undesirable flavor notes in the coffee. They are 
purportedly caused by some sort of incorrect choice 
on the part of the roaster operator leading to a 
“bad” roast profile. These defects are considered 
subjective because, in many ways, beauty is in the 
eye of the beholder. When it comes to coffee, if the 
person roasting it, and the people consuming it 
consider the coffee to be good, is it a defect? Due at 
least in part, to the taste or opinion based nature of 
these defects, there are not clear definitions of what 
causes them, or even consistent nomenclature.
In the following section I will endeavor to describe 
these defects and point to the commonly identified 
cause. It is important for us to note that, because 
these are caused by the operator, they can be 
created to an extent on any piece of roasting 
equipment on the market.
Also note that the subjective roasting defects may 
be exacerbated or diminished by factors external 
to roasting. A coffee roasting professional will be 
roasting to suit the water that they are using to brew, 
taste, and perform quality control on the coffee. A 
thoughtful operator will roast with the composition 
of the water and brewing ratios that we have in our 
cupping labs in mind. Because of the variability of 
how coffee extracts, what is properly developed 
for our water mineral content or brewing ratio and 
composition may not be properly developed for 
another’s. For example, coffees roasted in areas with 
higher water minerality in mind tend to taste under-
developed when brewed with low mineral content 
water. This, in addition to flavor preference add a 
new layer of nuance to the discussion of under/
over-development and under/over-roasting. We 
commonly see this disagreement come up due to 
personal taste differences, cultural differences, or 
even generational differences. 
• UNDER-DEVELOPMENT
• OVER-DEVELOPMENT
•  ROASTY
• BAKED
KEY TERMS
ROASTING 
DEFECTS 
DEFINED
In this section on Subjective 
Roasting Defects, we will be 
focusing on the below terms: 

5
Subjective Roasting Defects
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
Classically, this roasting issue is characterized by  
a malty/nutty character, aggressive acidity, metallic, 
and vegetative characteristics. This is subjective  
for two reasons:
1. There is a segment of the population and 
roasting community that finds an aggressive 
acidity to be very positive 
2. It is dependent on the water you are using  
to brew / taste the coffee as well as the  
coffee to water ratio you are using.
For those sensitive to acidity or opposed to an 
excessive acidity in a coffee, a coffee may be 
described as under-developed; however that same 
coffee could be rated as properly developed or over-
developed by another taster. 
Classically, under-development has been talked 
about as being a result of either too short of a 
“development-time” (the time from the beginning of 
first crack until the end of the roast) or too low of an 
end temperature. It is however beneficial to separate 
the two as they have separate causes. Under roasted 
would address a final temperature that is too low, 
and under developed would point toward a time 
after the beginning of first crack that is to short. 
Additionally, whenever anyone says “under-developed 
or under-roasted” it should be understood as “for 
their preferences.”
UNDER-DEVELOPMENT
OVER-DEVELOPMENT
On the other side of the coin is what is considered 
“over-developed” coffees. These are coffees which 
are frequently characterized by low or muted acidity, 
a heaviness, and lack of nuance or depth. As with 
under-development this is all subjective and depends 
on the person.
This tends to come from too much time between 
the beginning of first crack and the end of the roast. 
Additionally, I think it is important to distinguish 
between over-developed and over-roasted. For the 
sake of defining terms: over-development meaning 
too much elapsed time after the beginning of first 
crack, and over-roasted meaning too high of a finish 
temperature.

6
Subjective Roasting Defects
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
ROASTY
This is possibly the most vague assessment made 
with regards to roasting defects. Simply put, this 
is often an indication that the person making the 
comment did not like your coffee.
On a serious note, this is more often than not 
attributed to over-roasted. It means that the issuer  
of the comment believes that the coffee would  
have been better with a lower end temperature.
BAKED
This one is one of the more hotly debated defects 
in roasting, as there are various definitions of what 
“baked” coffee is and how it occurs. Many would 
describe it as dull and lifeless, bready, malty, etc.
Some describe this defect as coming from too 
sharp a drop in RoR (Rate of Rise, the change in 
Temperature per unit of time =ΔT/Δt) after the 
first crack, or a large dip in the RoR after the first 
crack followed by a rise. Others identify it as 
stemming from a loss of bean temperature during 
sugar caramelization, and though the roast goes 
on to finish, the typical byproducts cannot be 
properly generated. Still others define it as a long 
development time (like 4+ mins) with a flat RoR. 
Essentially, there is not consensus on this point in 
the coffee roasting community. 
Similar to roasty, the only thing one can be sure  
of is that the person using the term found your 
coffee to be displeasing.

7
Objective Roasting Defects
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
• SCORCHING
• FACING 
• CHIPPING
• TIPPING
KEY TERMS
Objective roasting defects, on the other hand, 
are marked by obvious, and measurable 
markers. While they do cause flavor taints in 
the coffee, these off-flavors are not the sole 
means of identification. 
In this section on Objective 
 Roasting Defects, we will be 
focusing on the below terms: 
photo by Photographer Name ©2020
The defect commonly referred to as scorching is a 
defect where small brownish black or black specks 
appear on the outside surface of the bean. This 
commonly happens before the bean begins to turn 
brown. Scorching on the surface of the bean toward 
the end of roasting goes by a different name, facing.
Scorching’s root cause is that the metal in which 
the coffee bean is in contact during roasting is too 
hot, and wherever the coffee comes in-contact with 
that metal it causes a surface scorch on the bean. 
This can be caused by: charging too hot, charging 
with too low of airflow, or applying too much burner 
early in the roast (specifically when roasting on a 
thinner drum).
SCORCHING

8
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
FACING
Similar to scorching, Facing is caused by hot metal 
coming into contact with coffee and  generating 
surface damage. However, facing tends to come 
from either the beans being forced against the inner 
surfaces of the drum wall late in the roast once 
the volume of the batch has increased or due to 
overheating the metal of the drum toward the end 
of the roast.
The defect known as chipping is classified by a small, 
round or oblong crater which has been blown out of 
the bean during roasting. This defect tends to only 
occur in darker roasted coffees, specifically those 
roasted to or past the beginning of second crack.
There is, to my knowledge, no clear and researched 
reason for the occurrence of chipping. Many have 
suggested that pressure built up or trapped within 
the bean could cause the blowout to occur once the 
bean becomes brittle due to dark roasting. Others 
have cited uneven moisture content in the bean 
originally. Luckily this defect does not seem to have 
any perceived impact on flavor.
CHIPPING

9
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
TIPPING
Tipping primarily comes from roasting the coffee too 
rapidly. On the coffee bean, the point at which the 
embryo would have germinated is weaker than other 
parts of the bean. Because of how heat impacts 
the coffee unevenly (due to the shape and varying 
thickness of the seed) this soft spot can roast ahead 
of the rest of the bean or burn while the rest of the 
bean is progressing normally. Each seed has the 
potential for this issue, and the durability of this point 
seems to be connected with the overall density and 
growth altitude of the coffee. This charred spot on 
the bean will frequently occur at the beginning of the 
roast (before brown) but can sometimes occur late 
roast as well. Late occurrences are infrequent. 

10
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
COMMON 
CAUSES 
OF ROAST 
DEFECTS
Roasting Too Quickly
When thermal energy is transmitted to the 
coffee too quickly it can bring up a number of 
objective and subjective roasting defects. With 
regards to the objective defects, too much 
heat can cause tipping, and when the heat 
is over-applied through the metal surfaces 
we see scorching and facing. Subjectively, 
applying too much heat energy can push the 
roast along too quickly and cause “under-
development” if not properly controlled post 
first crack.
Roasting Too Slowly
When roasting too slowly, objective roasting 
defects are not really a concern, however 
subjective roasting defects can be a real 
issue. Roasting too slowly, particularly at the 
end of the roast can cause over-development. 
If the heat energy is slowed too dramatically, 
then baking can also be an issue.  
Unwanted Thermal 
Conductivity
Unwanted thermal conductivity, such as 
over-heated metal can cause scorching and 
facing depending on when in the roast the 
coffee beans are exposed to the hot metal. 
Additionally, it could be blamed for chipping 
as well. This is particularly speaking to some 
form of uneven heat energy distribution within 
the coffee bean that causes the chip to be 
blown off the bean at darker roast levels.
• ROASTING TOO QUICKLY
• ROASTING TOO SLOWLY
• UNWANTED THERMAL   
  CONDUCTIVITY 
COMMON  
CAUSES 
There are three major areas 
where roast defects tend to 
come from:

11
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
Loring roasters allow operators to avoid a number 
of roasting defects due to a system design that 
makes it unique compared to the majority of 
traditional drum roasters.
Convection Heating 
First of all, the objective roasting defects of  
scorching and facing tend to rely on the drum being 
directly heated by the power source. If there is no 
direct heat on the drum materials, then it is difficult  
if not impossible to overheat the metal which comes 
in contact with the beans to the point of causing 
these defects. 
Loring roaster design relies primarily on convection 
heat. This means that the primary method of roasting 
the beans comes through hot air, rather than contact 
with the metal drum surface. Coupling this with the 
high airflow, appropriate temperature faults, and 
temperature maximums the Loring (unless pushed 
outside of operating tolerances through fake roasting 
or settings changes) is not capable of producing 
these defects.
Thorough Drum Agitation
In addition to avoiding these defects by keeping  
direct heat off the drum walls themselves, Loring 
roasters also insure that the drum paddles are mixing 
and lofting the coffee as much as possible. This 
means that the machine is, through paddle design 
and rotation speed, ensuring that the beans are being 
evenly heated and appropriately moved throughout 
the drum. Scorching, and facing are,  
once again, avoided.
Proper Drum Sizing
Finally, through proper drum sizing, the Loring 
machines prevent coffee from getting stuck against 
the side walls of the machine due to volume 
expansion from roasting. The Loring product line is at 
most 25% full relative to the volume of the drum when 
loaded with a full capacity batch. This means that 
were the beans to swell to their theoretical maximum 
(100%) the drum would still only be half full.
HOW LORING 
ROASTERS 
HELP AVOID 
DEFECTS

12
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS
In addition to preventing some commonly occuring 
objective defects through engineering and design, 
the Loring roaster also gives the roast operator 
incredible control over the roast through rapid and 
comprehensive data feedback, and quick response 
to control inputs.
Comprehensive Data Feedback
The Loring roaster comes stock with 4 
thermocouple probes to measure the air 
temperature throughout the system as well as 
the coffee bean surface temperature. Through 
monitoring the stack, inlet, and exhaust the roaster 
operator is able to fully understand the preheat 
conditions of the roaster as they are preparing to 
start a roast as well as the conditions during the 
roast with regards to heat being applied to the 
coffee. By using all of the data available, a skilled 
roaster operator can make informed decisions that 
help them avoid subjective roasting defects based 
on their individual thresholds and profile goals.
The Loring roaster also utilizes an incredibly thin 
and responsive bean temperature probe (one of the 
thinnest I’ve seen for commercial coffee roasters). 
This thin size at the point of measurement means 
that thermal lag in the data measurements is 
minimized and the probe is able to rapidly respond 
AVOIDING 
SUBJECTIVE 
ROAST 
DEFECTS
to control changes as well as changes in the 
bean surface temperature. This shares a similar 
advantage with the number of thermocouple 
measurements at the operator’s disposal as it 
allows them to make informed and rapid decisions 
to steer their profile away from subjective roasting 
defects as they define them.
Fast Response to Control Input
Not only are the thermocouples quick to adapt 
to the changing controls of the roaster, but the 
roaster itself (even the 1 bagger) is able to rapidly 
change course when given a control adjustment. 
Often, in the roasting community, people talk about 
missing a power adjustment minutes earlier, and 
being forced to live with the consequences down-
stream from that control change event. With Loring 
roasters, changes you make are reflected almost 
immediately. The engineering around the lower 
mass stainless steel drum as well as the high 
airflow running through the machine significantly 
speed up the reaction time of the machine to 
control changes when roasting. The bottom line is 
that when you say go, the machine goes. And when 
you say slow down, the machine responds (not 
literally say… as there is no connection to Alexa or 
Siri yet… but you get the point). All of this puts the 
operator comfortably in the driver’s seat and not at 
the mercy of the heat retention of the machine.

13
Through design features, the Loring 
roaster is able to avoid two objective 
roast defects which are common among 
roasters, especially those newer to 
roasting. Of course profiling to avoid 
tipping is something everyone must deal 
with, and the subjective roasting defects 
have as much to do with profile as they do 
preference; but being able to roast 
without concern for scorching and 
facing is a Loring advantage.
LORING
ADVANTAGE
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS

14
Roasting defects can be a big deal when it comes 
to producing quality, specialty coffee. Whether it’s 
that lingering, bitter, ashen character clouding the 
aftertaste of an otherwise beautiful coffee, or feeling 
like you have no control over your own machine 
and have a litany of subjective or objective issues. 
You’re aware of the definitions, root causes, flavor 
outcomes, and means of avoidance. Take time 
before buying a roaster and consider feedback 
being given on user forums, real-life experiences 
of roasters you appreciate and whose experiences 
you value, and information provided to you by 
manufacturers (as well as how those stack with the 
end user experience). Take some time to consider 
the Loring roaster product line and check up on 
it’s claims and features. You’ll find nothing but a 
wonderful Loring representative on the other end 
able to answer your questions… or reach out to me 
(Rob Hoos). And if you find yourself facing any of 
these subjective or objective defects and don’t know 
what to change or where to turn, book a time with 
me and I’ll help get you sorted.
CONCLUSION
LORING ® SMART ROAST   |   TECHNICAL PAPER   |   2020
HOW TO AVOID ROASTING DEFECTS

ROB HOOS
Coffee Roasting Consultant and Author
Rob is an independent coffee roasting 
consultant as well as director of coffee 
for Nossa Familia (Portland). He has 
served as an SCA Lead Instructor for 
Roaster classes as well as a member 
of the Roasters Guild Education 
Committee. He’s also author of 
“Modulating the Flavor Profile of Coffee: 
One Roaster’s Manifesto”.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
,
VISIT LORING.COM FOR MORE INFORMATION, 
TO SCHEDULE A DEMO, OR REQUEST A QUOTE.
Loring Smart Roast, Inc.
3200 Dutton Avenue, Suite 413 
Santa Rosa, CA 95407
+1 707 526 7215
sales@loring.com
©2020 Loring Smart Roast, Inc.
The Following are trademarks of Loring Smart Roast, Inc. :
Loring, The Smarter Way to Roast, and the flame symbol.  
1010764 Rev. v.A
