Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409517-5.00020-6	
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
183
C H A P T E R 
20
Melanoidins in Coffee
José A. Rufián-Henares, Silvia Pastoriza
Department of Nutrition and Food Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Granada, Campus Cartuja S/N, 
Granada, Spain
List of Abbreviations
MR  Maillard reaction
HMW  High-molecular weight
LMW  Low-molecular weight
GMNs  Galactomannans
AGLs  Arabinogalactans
AGPs  Arabinogalactan proteins
MRPs  Maillard reaction products
20.1  INTRODUCTION
Coffee, one of the most consumed drinks in the world 
and with a distinct aroma and flavor, is prepared from the 
roasted seeds of the Coffea plant.1 Different compounds 
found in green coffee beans are degraded/transformed 
to some extent, giving rise to a decrease of the amount of 
carbohydrates and chlorogenic acids and the appearance 
of melanoidins.2 Melanoidins are a heterogeneous group 
of nitrogen-containing brown polymers produced during 
the last steps of the Maillard reaction (MR).3 Coffee mela­
noidins are responsible for coffee’s characteristic brown 
color because they can absorb light at high wavelengths 
such as 420 nm.4 This absorbance is useful in evaluating 
the melanoidins content in coffee brew,5 although other 
methods, such as quantification by difference, also are 
possible.6 In the case of roasted coffee beans, the melanoi­
din content accounts for up to 25%,2 although this content 
increases with stronger roasting processes.7 This chapter 
focuses on the structure and composition of melanoidins 
and the mechanisms of their formation.
20.2  CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
As stated above, coffee melanoidins are considered to 
be high-molecular-weight (HMW) brownish compounds. 
However, their chemical structure is not fully understood 
because of both the large diversity of structures that couple 
to build the different melanoidin fractions and the difficulty 
in isolating and characterizing such fractions. A first step 
in the elucidation of coffee melanoidin structure relies on 
estimating their molecular weight. This has been done by 
different separation techniques that isolate melanoidins by 
using their heavy molecular weight. Among these, ultra­
filtration, diafiltration, and dialysis are the most suitable 
for isolating melanoidins, using membranes with different 
molecular weight cut offs, ranging from 3 to 100 kDa.8–10 
Although no general consensus regarding the real molecu­
lar weight of coffee melanoidins exists, it is more accepted 
that they have a mass ranging from 3 to 22 kDa.8 In addi­
tion, these melanoidins could be linked in a noncovalent 
manner to build a small fraction with a molecular mass 
higher than 100 kDa. Other authors also state that in addi­
tion to the HMW fraction, a low-molecular-weight (LMW) 
fraction is also found.9 According to this article, 69% of 
coffee melanoidins has a molecular weight higher than 
12 kDa and 29% are LMW melanoidins. In addition, the 
increasing formation of HMW melanoidins as a response 
to a severe roasting process has been demonstrated.11
A second purification step relies on the different physi­
cochemical properties of the HMW fraction previously 
isolated. For example, depending on their hydrophobic­
ity, other LMW fractions were obtained using solid phase 
extraction.9 A different approach uses the metal chelating 
ability of coffee melanoidins, separating the HMW com­
plex into fractions with different copper-chelating strengths 
using copper affinity chromatography.12 Related to this, 
because of the anionic behavior of coffee melanoidins, they 
can also be isolated by anion exchange chromatography.7 
In the case of melanoidin solubility, ethanol partitioning 
can be used to obtain fractions with different polysaccha­
ride composition.13 At ethanol concentrations of 40–50%, 
galactomannans (GMNs) precipitate, whereas arabinoga­
lactans (AGLs) precipitate at 75–80%; the remaining solu­
ble compounds have the lowest carbohydrate content.

20.  COFFEE MELANOIDINS
184
I.   INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL TEXT
Regarding the physicochemical properties of coffee 
melanoidins, their solubility depends on the size of the 
polymer and its chemical nature. In coffee, melanoi­
dins are quite hydrophilic because of their intermedi­
ate molecular weight (3–33 kDa; see Table 20.1 for more 
information). However, in other foods with high protein 
content, carbohydrates react through the MR to build a 
cross-linked HMW network that is insoluble.3 In addi­
tion, the LMW fraction of coffee melanoidins has a 
hydrophobic nature.9 Another interesting property of 
melanoidins is their polyanionic behavior.14 Coffee mel­
anoidins are negatively charged, but the distribution of 
such charges is heterogeneous15 in that the HMW frac­
tion is more charged than the LMW one.9 According to 
this, almost half of the anionic fractions have copper-
chelating properties.12 In the case of coffee melanoidins, 
the source of these negative charges seems to rely on the 
presence of chlorogenic acids,16 although melanoidins 
from other foods without chlorogenic acids also show 
such anionic behavior.14 Coffee melanoidins consists of 
a mixture of carbohydrates, amino acids, and phenolic 
compounds that interact during coffee roasting. In the 
case of polysaccharides, the predominant species in green 
coffee beans are GMNs and AGLs, which comprise up 
to 50% of the bean’s dry weight.2 AGLs are covalently 
linked to proteins in both green and roasted coffee17 in 
the form of arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs), and differ­
ent melanoidin fractions also contain 50% of brownish 
AGPs.15 Both GMNs and AGLs undergo different chemi­
cal (caramelization, MR, oxidation, etc.) and structural 
modifications (e.g., AGL debranching and GMN polym­
erization) because of the thermal treatment that occurs 
during the roasting process.13,18 These polysaccharides 
are covalently linked to the different melanoidin popu­
lations,7,8,12 although the exact types of linkages is yet 
unknown (for a more detailed explanation see Ref. 2).
Proteins are especially rich in the melanoidin fraction 
with a higher solubility at an ethanol concentration of 
80%.7,8 The proteins linked to melanoidins have a high 
concentration of aspartic and glutamic acids, as well as 
alanine and glycine, whereas the amounts of histidine, 
lysine, methionine, tyrosine, and arginine are lower than 
those in green coffee proteins.16 This could be explained 
by taking into account the protein degradation that 
occurs as a consequence of the roasting process and the 
extent of the MR. Then, some MR products derived from 
these amino acids, such a Nε-(fructosyl)lysine or Nε-
(carboxymethyl)lysine, also are included in the melanoi­
din structure.12
The amount of phenolic compounds in green coffee is 
high (up to 10%), so it is clear that some of them can 
be incorporated within the melanoidin structure. The 
main part of phenolic compounds in coffee is chlo­
rogenic acids, which includes different acids such as 
caffeic, coumaric, or ferulic acid.19 Less than 1% of 
the chlorogenic acids found in green coffee are incor­
porated into melanoidins, although during roasting 
the phenolics linked to melanoidins increase to up to 
29% of the overall phenolic compounds found in the 
coffee brew.20 It is noteworthy that these chlorogenic 
acids incorporated during the first stages of the pro­
cess are later degraded. These acids have been demon­
strated to be noncovalently linked to the melanoidin 
skeleton in soluble coffee21 through hydrogen, hydro­
phobic, or ionic bonding and can be released during 
gastrointestinal digestion,22 which allows their possible 
absorption at the intestinal level. In addition, the pres­
ence of phenolic compounds covalently linked to the 
melanoidin core has been speculated using the Folin-
Ciocalteu reagent15 and the detection of phenols by 
thermal degradation of coffee melanoidins.23,24 How­
ever, the presence of chlorogenic acids in the melanoi­
din structure was confirmed by alkaline fusion, which 
released different chemical species derived from caffeic 
and ferulic acids.12 The linking site of such phenols is 
still being studied, although it has been proposed that 
TABLE 20.1  Physicochemical Properties of Melanoidins
Foods Containing Melanoidins
Color Intensity
Appearance
Water Solubility
Hygroscopicity
Coffee
++++
Large, iridescent, flat flakes
++++
++
Chocolate
+++
Hardened agglomerate
++
++++
Balsamic vinegar
+++
Short, flat flakes
+++
++
Sweet wine
++++
Short, flat flakes
++
+++
Dark beer
+++
Powder
+++
++
Pilsner-style beer
++
Powder
+++
++
Bread crust
+
Spongy mass
+
++
Breakfast cereals
+
Spongy mass
+
++
Biscuits
+
Spongy mass
+
+

20.3  Mechanistic Formation and Structure of Coffee Melanoidins
185
I.   INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL TEXT
chlorogenic acids could be linked to the melanoidin 
skeleton through proteins25 or through the arabinose 
residues of GMNs and AGLs.16 The most recent results 
in the field26 indicate that phenolic compounds interact 
with coffee storage proteins (legumin-like seed stor­
age proteins of the 11S class) thanks to polyphenol oxi­
dase activity. These chlorogenic acids react covalently 
with lysine at the α chain and undergo oxidation by 
polyphenol oxidase, giving rise to colored compounds 
ranging from light yellow to dark green. The develop­
ment of dark pigments because of the presence of poly­
phenols also has been seen in melanoidins from other 
foods such as sweet wine or grape syrup.4
Other LMW compounds have been found in cof­
fee melanoidins and melanoidins from different foods 
and model systems. Some of the LMW compounds 
attached to melanoidins are odor-active thiols, such 
as 2-furfurylthiol, 3-methyl-2-butenthiol, 3-mercapto-
3-methylbutyl formate, 2-methyl-3-furanthiol, and 
methanethiol, that influence the flavor of the coffee 
brew.27 Others are furans accompanied by pirazines, 
pyrroles, pyridines, and carbonyl compounds.4 Most of 
these compounds are chromogenic, with different colors 
such as blue (pyrrolopyrrole dimer), red (pyrrolopyrrole 
azepine), and yellow (acetyl pyrimidine and acetyl 
azepinone). These colorants have an extraordinary 
polymerizing activity, which suggests that they are 
reaction intermediates for melanoidin formation.28 The 
involvement of such LMW colored compounds in the 
formation of melanoidins is discussed in the next section.
All the fractions mentioned above—LMW and HMW 
proteins, polysaccharides, and phenolic compounds—give 
rise to many different biological effects such as antioxi­
dant,29 antimicrobial,30 or antihypertensive activities31 
that depend strongly on fraction’s chemical composition 
(Table 20.2), as reviewed elsewhere.2–4
20.3  MECHANISTIC FORMATION AND 
STRUCTURE OF COFFEE MELANOIDINS
The formation of melanoidins is quite complicated 
in real foods and has been studied using model sys­
tems. In these systems, reaction time and temperature 
dictate that the molecular weight of coffee melanoi­
dins, since pH influences the development of chromo­
phores.4 In general, there are three theories about how 
HMW melanoidins are formed. The first theory states 
that the HMW complexes are formed from LMW inter­
mediates coming from the MR (pyrroles, furans, etc.) 
that polymerize during the later stages of the reaction.28 
As stated in the previous section, the LMW chromo­
phores are reaction intermediates, which means that 
their polymerizing activity depends strongly on the 
heating time. A second theory32 proposes that the HMW 
melanoidin complexes are formed by the cross-linking 
activity of chromophoric LMW compounds and the 
reactive side chains of several amino acids (lysine, 
arginine, cysteine). Different chromophores have been 
isolated through the reaction of α-dicarbonyl com­
pounds, furans, or their nitrogen-containing deriva­
tives with arginine, lysine, or casein.4 The nitrogen 
atoms of such colored compounds can then be included 
within proteins via the furan-derived structures pro­
duced upon the thermal degradation of carbohydrates 
or the amino and guanidine groups of amino acids. 
The third theory postulates that the melanoidin core is 
made of sugar derivatives (degradation products such 
as α-dicarbonyl compounds, oligosaccharides, and/
or polysaccharides) branched with amino acids.33 The 
main structure of such saccharides remains uncharged 
in low-moisture media, reacting with amino acids at 
their reducing end. In addition, a small part of the 
glycosidic bonds is broken, allowing transglycosyl­
ation reactions during the first stages of the MR that 
increase the branching state of the melanoidin skel­
eton. This is the situation in real foods such as coffee 
or cocoa, where the MR takes place at low moisture 
content and high temperature (>150 °C) in short time 
periods (ranging from minutes to a few hours). On the 
other hand, α-dicarbonyl compounds react with pro­
teins via aldolic condensation in high-moisture media 
to increase the complexity of the melanoidin back­
bone.4 This is how melanoidins form in high-moisture 
foods such as beer or sweet wine, where the MR 
takes place for longer periods (fermentation or stor­
age for days or months) at low temperatures (<50 °C). 
TABLE 20.2  Biological Activities of Coffee Melanoidins
Biological Activity
Active Structure
Prebiotic
AGLs and GMNs
Anticariogenic
Polymeric backbone
Food preservation
Polymeric backbone
Fiber-like antioxidant activity
AGLs and GMNs
Antioxidant activity in coffee 
brew
HMW and LMW fractions
Plasma antioxidant capacity
N-methylpyridinium
Toxic compound binding
HMW fraction
Aroma compound binding
AGLs, GMNs, or chlorogenic acids
Cation binding
HMW fraction
Chemopreventive
HMW fraction
Anticarcinogenic
HMW fraction
Antihypertensive
HMW and LMW fractions
AGL, arabinogalactan; GMN, galactomannan; HMW, high-molecular weight; 
LMW, low-molecular weight.

20.  COFFEE MELANOIDINS
186
I.   INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL TEXT
Then, because of the extensive polymerization, food 
melanoidins (especially those coming from liquid 
foods) are richer in HMW compounds than in LMW 
ones.
The different chemical composition of coffee mela­
noidins suggests that they can be formed through dif­
ferent pathways. In this sense, previously published 
articles seem to indicate that the above three theo­
ries may occur during coffee roasting (Figure 20.1). 
The presence of volatile compounds, such as furans 
and carbonyl compounds, in thermally degraded 
coffee melanoidins,23 as well as the formation of the 
polymerizing CROSSPY radical during coffee roast­
ing, reinforce the plausibility of the first theory. In 
the case of the second and third theories, other stud­
ies have pointed out the presence of different popula­
tions of modified and nonmodified proteins12,16,26 and 
polysaccharides7,8,12,15 on the melanoidin backbone 
(Figures 20.2 and 20.3). Nunes and coworkers34 
recently studied these several formation pathways 
through a novel “in bean” model. The first idea stated 
by the authors is that the formation of the melanoidin 
itself and the brown compounds during coffee roast­
ing have distinct origins. On one hand, the presence 
of soluble sugar in coffee is one of the main factors 
for the development of LMW brownish compounds 
linked to proteins and polysaccharides. On the other 
ŽīĞĞ
ŵĞůĂŶŽŝĚŝŶƐ
FIGURE 20.1  The mechanisms of melanoidin formation in 
coffee. Adapted with permission from Nunes and Coimbra.25 Copyright© 
2010, Springer.
Đ
FIGURE 20.2  Relevance of proteins and phenolic compounds in the formation of coffee melanoidins. Adapted with permission from Nunes 
and Coimbra.25 Copyright© 2010, Springer.
FIGURE 20.3  Relevance of arabinogalactan proteins and galactomannans in the formation of coffee melanoidins. Adapted with permission 
from Nunes and Coimbra.25 Copyright© 2010, Springer.

20.5  Summary Points
187
I.   INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL TEXT
hand, sugars such as sucrose do not increase the final 
amount of HMW melanoidins. In the same way, AGPs 
were the other source (in addition to chlorogenic acid) 
of brown compounds, in accordance with other arti­
cles.15 This could be related to the reaction of the arab­
inose side chains with reducing sugars upon roasting. 
Finally, Nunes and coworkers also found that the cell 
wall material is responsible for generating a large 
amount of melanoidins. Then, the roasting-induced 
pyrolysis of cell wall polysaccharides such as GMNs 
accounts for 47% of the melanoidin formed. All the 
chemical species responsible for the formation of cof­
fee melanoidins are depicted in Figure 20.4.
20.4  FINAL REMARKS
In the past decade the elucidation of melanoidins’ 
structure, composition, and formation pathways cen­
tered the interest of many research groups worldwide. 
The European COST Action 919 “Melanoidins in food 
and health” was the driving force behind melanoidin 
research in Europe. In the past 10 years research activity 
moved toward the biological activity of these polymers. 
Therefore, the knowledge about the amount and forma­
tion of melanoidins in different foodstuffs will allow the 
formulation of new foods with improved sensorial or 
technical and biological activities.
20.5  SUMMARY POINTS
	•	 Coffee melanoidins are brown nitrogen-containing 
polymers produced during coffee roasting.
	•	 The amount of coffee melanoidins accounts for up 
to 25% of the roasted coffee and increases with the 
severity of roasting.
	•	 Coffee melanoidins are composed of different 
chemical species such as GMNs, AGLs, proteins, 
chlorogenic acids, and MR products.
	•	 The formation of melanoidins is explained by three 
different theories involving the polymerization of 
LMW MR products, cross-linking activity of LMW 
compounds over proteins, and/or the reaction of 
polysaccharides with proteins.
	•	 Coffee melanoidins are generated by these three 
mechanisms, including the additional reaction of 
phenolic compounds.
ŵĂƚĞƌŝĂů
ŽīĞĞ
ŵĞůĂŶŽŝĚŝŶƐ
FIGURE 20.4  Main chemical species of coffee melanoidins. Adapted with permission from Nunes and Coimbra.25 Copyright© 2010, Springer.

20.  COFFEE MELANOIDINS
188
I.   INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL TEXT
References
	 1.	 Villanueva C, Cantor KP, King WD, Jaakkola J, Cordier S, Lynch 
CF, et al. Total and specific ﬂuid consumption as determinants of 
bladder cancer risk. Int J Cancer 2006;118:2040–7.
	 2.	 Moreira A, Nunes FM, Domingues R, Coimbra M. Coffee mela­
noidins: structures, mechanisms of formation and potential health 
impacts. Food Funct 2012;3:903–15.
	 3.	 Morales F, Somoza V, Fogliano V. Physiological relevance of di­
etary melanoidins. Amino Acids 2012;42:1097–109.
	 4.	 Wang H, Qian H, Yao W. Melanoidins produced by the Mail­
lard reaction: structure and biological activity. Food Chem 
2011;128:573–84.
	 5.	 Morales FJ, Jimenez-Perez S. Eur Food Res Technol 2004;218:515–20.
	 6.	 Illy A, Illy E, Macrae R, Petracco M, Sondahl R, Valussi S, et al. 
Espresso coffee: the chemistry of quality. London: Academic Press; 
1995.
	 7.	 Bekedam EK, Loots MJ, Schols HA, Van Boekel MA, Smit G. Roast­
ing effects on formation mechanisms of coffee brew melanoidins. 
J Agric Food Chem 2008;56:7138–45.
	 8.	 Gniechwitz D, Reichardt N, Meiss E, Ralph J, Steinhart H, Blaut 
M, et  al. Characterization and fermentability of an ethanol sol­
uble high molecular weight coffee fraction. J Agric Food Chem 
2008;56:5960–9.
	 9.	 Bekedam EK, Roos E, Schols HA, Martinus AJ, Van Boekel S, Smit 
G. Low molecular weight melanoidins in coffee brew. J Agric Food 
Chem 2008;56:4060–7.
	10.	 Rufián-Henares JA, de la Cueva SP. Antimicrobial activity of coffee 
melanoidins – a study of their metal-chelating properties. J Agric 
Food Chem 2009;57:432–8.
	11.	 Bekedam EK, Schols HA, Cämmerer B, Kroh LW, van Boekel MA, 
Smit G. Electron spin resonance (ESR) studies on the formation of 
roasting-induced antioxidative structures in coffee brews at differ­
ent degrees of roast. J Agric Food Chem 2008;56:4597–604.
	12.	 Nunes FM, Coimbra MA. Melanoidins from coffee infusions. Frac­
tionation, chemical characterization and effect of the degree of 
roast. J Agric Food Chem 2007;55:3967–77.
	13.	 Nunes FM, Coimbra MA. Chemical characterization of the high-
molecular-weight material extracted with hot water from green 
and roasted robusta coffees as affected by the degree of roast. J Agric 
Food Chem 2002;50:7046–52.
	14.	 Morales FJ. Application of capillary zone electrophoresis to 
the study of food and food-model melanoidins. Food Chem 
2002;76:363–9.
	15.	 Bekedam EK, De Laat MP, Schols HA, Van Boekel MA, Smit G. 
Arabinogalactan proteins are incorporated in negatively charged 
coffee brew melanoidins. J Agric Food Chem 2007;55:761–8.
	16.	 Bekedam EK, Schols HA, Van Boekel MA, Smit G. Incorporation 
of chlorogenic acids in coffee brew melanoidins. J Agric Food Chem 
2008;56:2055–63.
	17.	 Redgwell RJ, Curti D, Fischer M, Nicolas P, Fay LB. Coffee bean 
arabinogalactans: acidic polymers covalently linked to protein. 
Carbohydr Res 2002;337:239–53.
	18.	 Moreira ASP, Coimbra MA, Nunes FM, Simoes J, Domingues 
MRM. Evaluation of the effect of roasting on the structure of coffee 
galactomannans using model oligosaccharides. J Agric Food Chem 
2011;59:10078–87.
	19.	 Farah A, Donangelo CM, Braz J. Phenolic compounds in coffee. 
Braz J Plant Physiol 2006;18:23–36.
	20.	 Perrone D, Farah A, Donangelo CM. Influence of coffee roasting 
on the incorporation of phenolic compounds into melanoidins and 
their relationship with antioxidant activity of the brew. J Agric Food 
Chem 2012;60:4265–75.
	21.	 Delgado-Andrade C, Morales FJ. Influence of coffee roasting on the 
incorporation of phenolic compounds into melanoidins and their 
relationship with antioxidant activity of the brew. J Agric Food Chem 
2005;53:1403–7.
	22.	 Rufián-Henares JA, Morales FJ. Effect of in vitro enzymatic diges­
tion on antioxidant activity of coffee melanoidins and fractions. 
J Agric Food Chem 2007;55:10016–21.
	23.	 Adams A, Borrelli RC, Fogliano V, De Kimpe N. Thermal degrada­
tion studies of food melanoidins. J Agric Food Chem 2005;53:4136–42.
	24.	 Heinrich L, Baltes W. Vorkommen von Phenolen in Kaffee-­
Melanoidinen. Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 1987;185:366–70.
	25.	 Nunes FM, Coimbra MA. Role of hydroxycinnamates in coffee 
melanoidin formation. Phytochem Rev 2010;9:171–85.
	26.	 Ali M, Homann T, Kreisel J, Khalil M, Puhlmann R, Kruse HP, 
et al. Characterization and modeling of the interactions between 
coffee storage proteins and phenolic compounds. J Agric Food Chem 
2012;60:11601–8.
	27.	 Hofmann T, Schieberle P. Chemical interactions between odor-­
active thiols and melanoidins involved in the aroma staling of 
coffee beverages. J Agric Food Chem 2002;50:319–26.
	28.	 Hayase F, Usui T, Watanabe H. Chemistry and some biological ef­
fects of model melanoidins and pigments as Maillard intermedi­
ates. Mol Nutr Food Res 2006;50:1171–9.
	29.	 Delgado-Andrade C, Rufián-Henares JA, Morales FJ. Assessing the 
antioxidant activity of melanoidins from coffee brews by different 
antioxidant methods. J Agric Food Chem 2005;53:7832–6.
	30.	 Rufián-Henares JA, Morales FJ. Antimicrobial activity of melanoi­
dins against Escherichia coli is mediated by a membrane-damage 
mechanism. J Agric Food Chem 2008;56:2357–62.
	31.	 Rufián-Henares JA, Morales FJ. Angiotensin-I converting en­
zyme inhibitory activity of coffee melanoidins. J Agric Food Chem 
2007;55:1480–5.
	32.	 Hofmann T. Studies on the relationship between molecular weight 
and the colour potency of fractions obtained by thermal treatment 
of glucose/amino acid and glucose/protein solutions by using ul­
tracentrifugation and colour dilution techniques. J Agric Food Chem 
1998;46:3891–5.
	33.	 Cammerer B, Jalyschko W, Kroh LW. Intact carbohydrate struc­
tures as part of the melanoidin skeleton. J Agric Food Chem 2002;
50:2083–7.
	34.	 Nunes FM, Cruz ACS, Coimbra MA. Insight into the mechanism 
of coffee melanoidin formation using modified “in Bean” Models. 
J Agric Food Chem 2012;60:8710–9.
