Changes in Green Coffee Protein Profiles during Roasting
PHILIPPE MONTAVON,* ANNE-FRANCE MAURON, AND ELIANE DURUZ
Nestle´ Research Centre, Nestec Ltd., Vers-chez-les-Blanc, P.O. Box 44,
CH-1000 Lausanne 26, Switzerland
To reveal its flavor, coffee has to be roasted. In fact, the green coffee bean contains all ingredients
necessary for the later development of coffee flavor. It is now widely accepted that free amino acids
and peptides are required for the generation of coffee aroma. However, the mechanisms leading to
defined mixtures of free amino acids and peptides remain unknown. Information pertaining to the
identification of precursor proteins is also lacking. To answer some of these questions, two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) was used to follow the fate of green coffee proteins.
Two conditions were considered: roasting and incubation of green coffee suspensions at 37 °C.
Coffee beans were observed to acquire the potential to spontaneously release H2O2 upon
polymerization of their proteins during roasting. Fragmentation of proteins was also observed.
Conversely, H2O2 was found to control polymerization and fragmentation of green coffee proteins in
solution at 37 °C. Polymerization and fragmentation patterns under the two conditions were
comparable. These observations suggest that the two conditions under study triggered, at least to
some extent, similar biochemical mechanisms involving autoxidation. Throughout this study, a unique
fragmentation cascade involving the 11S coffee storage protein was identified. Generated fragments
shared an atypical staining behavior linked to their sensitivity to redox conditions.
KEYWORDS: Green coffee; roasting; storage protein; autoxidation; hydrogen peroxide; two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
INTRODUCTION
Coffee aroma development and coffee browning are es-
sentially considered to be consequences of Maillard reactions
(1, 2). These reactions are initiated by the interaction of the
carbonyl group of a reducing sugar and the free amino group
of an amino acid, a peptide, or even a protein (3). After
condensation reactions, brown nitrogenous polymers called
melanoidins are produced (4-7).
In the green coffee bean, potential nitrogenous flavor precur-
sors are represented by free amino acids, peptides, and proteins.
The protein content is relatively high, representing 8.7-12.2%
of the coffee bean dry weight, based on crude nitrogen and
corrected for nonprotein nitrogenous components (8). Green
coffee proteins, the 11S storage protein in particular (9),
represent an important reservoir for free amino acids and
peptides. In comparison, the free amino acid content appears
to be rather low, in the range of 0.3-0.6% on a dry weight
basis (10). There is no information available to suggest that
these free amino acids are either required or sufficient for the
generation of the coffee aroma. Peptides were isolated from the
green bean by Ludwig and colleagues (11) in amounts ranging
from 0.4 to 0.6% on a dry weight basis. They also identified
several endopeptidases. The contribution of these peptides to
coffee flavor was suggested by model roasting trials. However,
alternative mechanisms and sources of free amino acids and
peptides may be considered in relation to flavor generation.
Like other phenols, the chlorogenic acids (CGAs) are prone
to oxidation. Coffee beans are one of the richest sources of
CGAs [7-10 and 5-7.5% on a dry weight basis for Robustas
and Arabicas, respectively (12)]. These CGAs are a family of
esters formed between defined transcinnamic acids (caffeic and
ferulic) and quinic acid. Their tendency to oxidize during
maturation of the cherry, postharvest processing, and storage
ultimately defines the redox status of the green coffee beans.
The actual redox status of the green bean seems to be important
for the development of quality in the brew (13). During that
study, we identified the involvement of oxidative processes in
the degradation of the 11S coffee storage protein. We are now
interested in the fate of this very same protein during roasting,
an essential step for the development of coffee aroma.
Here we provide evidence that the 11S storage protein follows
a specific degradation pathway during roasting. Degradation
proceeded in a sustained fashion over more than half of the
required roasting time. Concurrently, transient redox-active
protein fragments were generated. To obtain a better insight
into the mechanisms involved, we tried to mimic the observed
fragmentation and polymerization processes in solution at 37
°C. Increasing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) concentrations were
used to trigger the oxidation of CGAs and other phenols. Similar
polymerization and fragmentation patterns of 11S storage protein
were obtained under these conditions. The possible contribution
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed (telephone +21/
785-8927; fax +21/785-8554; e-mail philippe.montavon@rdls.nestle.com).
J. Agric. Food Chem. 2003, 51, 2335−2343
2335
10.1021/jf020832b CCC: $25.00
© 2003 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 03/14/2003

of autoxidation reactions to the formation of melanoidins will
be discussed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Origin of Green Coffee Samples. Postharvest Study. The first
roasting experiment was performed with a well-specified Arabica
(Coffea arabica) originating from Brazil (Santos). Samples were
processed according to our specifications and provided by Pinhalense
S.A., Maquinas Agricolas, Brazil. The three samples kept for analysis
differed only by the type of postharvest processing (dry, semidry, or
wet; see Table 1). Moisture contents for wet-, semidry-, and dry-
processed samples were, respectively, 12.1, 10.5, and 11.3% (weight
percent).
Roasting and H2O2 Incubation Studies. A commercially available
green coffee was preferred for subsequent studies. We chose a wet-
processed Colombian Arabica.
Protein Profiles of Damaged Beans. Three types of damaged beans
were analyzed for comparison with a healthy Arabica from Thailand.
These beans belonged to a collection of damaged beans.
Coated beans suffered from drought; they are characterized by a
strongly adherent silver skin (origin: Mexico).
“Cardinello beans” are fungus-infested beans, covered with yellow-
ish or reddish spores (origin: Colombia).
Black beans are beans with coffee berry disease (anthracnosis) caused
by the fungus Colletotrichum coffeeanum, renamed C. kahawae
(origin: Colombia).
Coffee Sample Preparation. Roasted Samples. Sixty grams (Santos
Arabica) and 250 g (Colombian Arabica) of green beans were roasted
at ∼240 °C in a laboratory-scale commercial drum roaster (Probat, BRZ
2). The temperature was adjusted by regulating the heating current and
the flow of air through the roasting drum.
Samples were drawn at different roasting times and ground (Retsch
type ZM1 mill) under liquid nitrogen before analysis. To estimate the
roasting level, the Neuhaus Colortest was applied by using a Neuhaus
electronic reflectometer. A sample of roasted and ground coffee (ground
on an Olympia mocca express mill set at 5.5), evenly distributed on a
circular surface (diameter ) 7 cm), is illuminated by a monochromatic
infrared source. The reflected light is expressed in Colortest numbers
(CTn), based on a linear scale ranging from 0 (black) to 200 (white).
Two minutes of roasting time elicited a weak browning, which was
outside the calibration curve and could not be determined.
Moisture/dry matter losses and CTn were recorded at definite roasting
times for the Santos Arabica samples (see Table 2).
Green Coffee Suspensions. Colombian green coffee beans were
milled under liquid nitrogen in a Retsch type ZM1 mill. Aliquots (1 g)
were suspended and incubated (24 h at 37 °C with agitation in the
presence of air) in either 10 mL of Milli-Q grade water (Millipore) or
H2O2 aqueous solutions (H2O2 concentrations: 97.9 µM, 979 µM, 9.79
mM, 97.9 mM, and 0.97 M). After incubation, the suspensions were
centrifuged (10 min at 1000 rpm) and the supernatants freeze-dried.
The remaining pellets were washed with 10 mL of Milli-Q grade water
and freeze-dried as well. Proteins of the freeze-dried powders were
analyzed by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-
PAGE).
Fluorometric Hydrogen Peroxide Assay. After roasting, 7.5 g of
milled coffee was added to 150 mL of boiling Milli-Q grade water.
After a short stirring, brews were left at room temperature in the dark.
After 30 min of incubation, 1 mL aliquots were removed, acidified
(35 µM HCl), and left on ice for 1 h to promote precipitation. After
centrifugation (minifuge, 10 min at 14000 rpm), H2O2 was determined
in the supernatant by the homovanillic acid/horseradish peroxidase
(HVA/HRPase) method as reported by Stadler et al. (14, 15).
Fluorescence was recorded at λex ) 314 nm and λem ) 425 nm with a
Hewlett-Packard spectrofluorometer. For the standard curves a 3% stock
solution of H2O2 (Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) was used and diluted
accordingly with Milli-Q grade H2O.
Two-Dimensional Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis. Apparatus.
Isoelectric focusing (IEF) separation was performed with an ISOBOX
(Hoefer Scientific Instruments, San Francisco, CA) connected to a
MultiDrive XL power supply from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech
(Europe GmbH). For the high-voltage run, a Consort power supply E
752 was used. The ISOBOX was modified so that the tray could
accommodate Immobiline DryStrips (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech,
Europe GmbH). SDS-PAGE was performed on vertical slab gels (160
× 200 × 1.5 mm) using a Protean II xi 2-D multicell (Bio-Rad). The
gels were cast in a Protean II multigel casting chamber (Bio-Rad) using
a model 395 gradient former (Bio-Rad). The gels were run using Bio-
Rad’s 3000xi power supply. Gels were scanned with the Personal Laser
Densitometer (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA) and analyzed on
a SUN Sparc Station 10 and Melanie II software from Bio-Rad.
Reagents. Reagents were from the following sources: Resolyte 3.5-
10 from BDH (Poole, U.K.); acrylamide 2X from Serva (Heidelberg,
Germany); piperazine diacrylamide (PDA), N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-
ethylenediamine (TEMED), and ammonium persulfate from Bio-Rad
(Glattbrugg, Switzerland); glycine and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
from Fluka; tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, 1,4-dithioerythritol
(DTE), and urea from Merck; 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethyl-
ammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS) from Sigma; and naphthalene-
Table 1. Comparison of the Three Postharvest Treatments Applied to Santos Arabicaa
method
dry
semidry
wet
type of coffee
natural
semidry
washed
processing
separation of floaters
yes
yes
yes
separation of greens
no
yes
yes
removal of pulp
no
yes
yes
removal of mucilage
no
no
yes
drying
yes, with pulp
yes, with mucilage
yes, without pulp
and mucilage
and mucilage
cleaning and destoning
yes
yes
yes
hulling
yes
yes
yes
polishing (removal of silver skin)
no
no
yes
size grading
yes
yes
yes
density separation
yes
yes
yes
a Steps that strongly differed between the different processes and were likely to affect two-dimensional protein profiles of the beans are in boldface type.
Table 2. Moisture and Dry Matter Losses (Boldface Numbers) and
Color Reflectance Values (in Parentheses) of Santos Arabica Samples
(Dry-, Semidry-, and Wet-Processed) during Roastinga
roasting time
processing
2 min
4 min
6 min
8 min
dry
3 (nd)
7 (185)
13 (139)
20 (47)
semidry
2 (nd)
7 (187)
12 (132)
20 (55)
wet
2 (nd)
7 (192)
12 (136)
19 (51)
a Moisture and dry matter losses are indicated in percent (boldface numbers).
Color test numbers (CTn, in parentheses) were determined as described under
Materials and Methods. When browning was too weak, CTn could not be determined
(nd).
2336
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
Montavon et al.

disulfonic acid disodium salt (NDS) from Kodak. All other chemicals
were of analytical grade.
Sampling. To follow the evolution of protein profiles during roasting,
30 coffee beans corresponding to each selected roasting time were
milled under liquid nitrogen and extracted [200 mg in 3 mL of
solubilization/lysis buffer (64 mM DTE, 65 mM CHAPS, 9 M urea,
35 mM Tris)].
For the analysis of water-soluble compounds generated during the
roasting process (water-soluble extracts), 1 g of milled coffee was mixed
with 0.1 g of polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) and suspended in 1.5
mL of Milli-Q grade H2O. After incubation (2-3 h at room temper-
ature), the water extract was centrifuged and the supernatant (300 µL)
mixed with the solubilization/lysis buffer (2.7 mL).
Freeze-dried suspensions were used as such for extraction (200 mg
in 3 mL of solubilization/lysis buffer).
Healthy and diseased green coffee samples were milled under
nitrogen and extracted (200 mg in 3 mL of solubilization/lysis buffer).
Protein Extraction. Each coffee homogenate, freeze-dried suspension
(200 mg), or water extract (300 µL) was mixed with 3 mL (2.7 mL for
water extracts) of solubilization/lysis buffer. Extraction was allowed
to proceed for at least 2-3 h at room temperature with occasional
vortexing. The Santos Arabica samples were, however, further extracted
overnight at 4 °C. Extracts were then centrifuged (20000g, 30 min, 15
°C) and supernatants either used immediately for electrophoresis or
stored at -20 °C until use.
Electrophoresis. (a) Standard Gels. The 2D-PAGE was performed
with immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips (Immobiline DryStrip gels,
Amersham Pharmacia Biotech; see ref 16) as described by Hochstrasser
et al. (17).
Santos Arabica protein extracts (40-60 µL) were loaded onto
rehydrated IPG strips with a nonlinear pH gradient (Immobiline
DryStrip, pH 3-10NL, 18 cm). Otherwise, 50 µL of extracts was loaded
onto the IPG strips. In the case of roasted coffee water extracts, narrow-
range IPG strips were used (Immobiline DryStrip, pH 4-7, 18 cm).
A 300 V potential was applied and increased linearly to 3500 V
within 3 h and then overnight at 5000 V (total of ∼100 kVh). The
temperature was maintained at 10 °C. The IPG were then equilibrated
in 100 mL of 0.05 M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 6.8, containing 6 M urea,
2% (w/v) SDS, 30% (w/v) glycerol, and 129 mM DTE. After 12 min,
the procedure was repeated with another 100 mL of equilibration buffer
containing 135 mM iodoacetamide and 250 µL of bromophenol blue
solution (0.5% w/v) instead of DTE (18). After equilibration, the IPG
strip gels were transferred to 9-16% gradient polyacrylamide gels (18,
19). SDS-PAGE was performed at 40 mA per gel at a constant
temperature of 8 °C. Then the gels were washed, fixed, and silver-
stained as described elsewhere (19).
(b) Gelatin Gels. To identify proteins that do not stain with silver
(negative staining), a modified 2D-PAGE procedure was applied.
Gelatin was added to the polyacrylamide matrix to generate a dark
background against which negatively staining proteins appear as white
spots. Gelatin A (15 mg %) was allowed to copolymerize with the
PDA-polyacrylamide gel. After the second dimensional run and prior
to staining, the gels were washed in 2.5% Triton X-100 (30 min, room
temperature) and then in Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4; 5 mM CaCl2)
at 40 °C during 120 min. The gels were then silver-stained as usual.
Phenol Staining. To reveal polyphenols on two-dimensional gels,
Folin-Ciocalteu’s reagent (Sigma) was used. After electrophoresis, gels
were fixed in 12% trichloroacetic acid, washed in H2O, and incubated
with Folin-Ciocalteu’s solution according to Jennings’ method (20)
until a blue coloration appeared.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Identification of 11S Storage Protein in Two-Dimensional
Gels. The coffee storage protein (11S) was characterized by
Rogers et al. (9). Its physiological role is to provide a source of
amino acids and nitrogen for seed germination. This protein
accounts for ∼45% of total proteins in the endosperm tissue,
representing 5-7% of coffee bean dry weight (9). Under
reducing conditions, the mature precursor form generates one
high molecular weight subunit (the R-component, ∼32 kDa)
and one low molecular weight subunit (the â-component, ∼22
kDa). Isoforms of each subunit constitute the R- and â-arm of
each subunit (Figures 2 and 3). On the basis of Rogers’s
publication, storage protein subunits can easily be recognized
on two-dimensional protein profiles of coffee.
Figure 1. Changes in green coffee protein profiles during roasting followed
by 2D-PAGE (Immobiline DryStrip, pH 3−10NL). Santos Arabica green
coffee was roasted for 2, 4, 6, and 8 min before analysis. H2O2 was
measured in the respective brews as described under Materials and
Methods (n ) 3, combining values obtained with three different postharvest
treatments).
Figure 2. Impact of postharvest processing on coffee protein profiles during
roasting. Profiles of Santos Arabica were followed by 2D-PAGE (Immobiline
DryStrip, pH 3−10NL). Three processing methods were compared: wet,
semidry, and dry. Storage protein subunits of the high (R-arm) and low
(â-arm) molecular weight subunits are in rectangles. An acidic curtain of
polymers appeared during roasting (arrows).
Coffee Proteins during Roasting
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
2337

Hydrogen Peroxide Release and Polymerization of Storage
Protein Isoforms. The generation of H2O2 in aerated coffee
solutions has been described by numerous investigators (14, 21,
22). Aqueous suspensions of green coffee beans do not generate
H2O2. The ability to form H2O2 is acquired during roasting (22;
Figure 1). This spontaneous reaction is called autoxidation and
is primarily attributed to various polyphenols. Temperature, pH,
and dissolved oxygen (O2) are decisive factors that control
autoxidation kinetics and H2O2 formation. Autoxidation con-
tributes to the sequential reduction of molecular O2 generating
reactive oxygen species (ROS): superoxide radical (O2•-), H2O2,
and the hydroxyl radical (OH•) (23-27). In the absence of
superoxide dismutase, O2•- is consumed by a pH-dependent
dismutation reaction that forms H2O2. The rate of dismutation
is maximal near pH 4.7 (28), a value close to what is usually
measured in coffee solutions (pH 5-6).
Under our conditions, a 4-min roast (CTn 185-192, Table
2) was required to detect the formation of H2O2 (Figure 1).
Formation of H2O2 then steadily increased during roasting,
reaching a 50 µM concentration at a roasting time of 8 min.
Simultaneously, we observed the formation of polymers in the
acidic region of the two-dimensional gels (pH 4-5.3) in the
form of a dark silver-stained curtain (Figures 1 and 2). The
polymers seamlessly occupied the molecular weight range (5-
250 kDa) covered by the acrylamide gradient. On the IPG strips
(first dimension), a band corresponding to these polymers could
be easily located due to its original brown color, clearly
indicating their involvement in the browning process. After 8
min of roasting (CTn 132-139), the polymeric curtain was
strongest and all protein spots had disappeared. Nonstorage
proteins disappeared within the first 4 min of roasting (except
for the wet-processed sample that displayed many new transient
spots). Storage protein isoforms were slower to disappear.
In wine, the oxidation of phenolic compounds is autocatalytic
due to regenerative polymerization leading to higher molecular
weight polymers with increasing reduction potential (29).
Improved resonance stabilization of phenolates and semi-
quinones provided by the highly conjugated structure of the
growing polymer likely explains the increasing reduction
potential toward O2. In coffee solutions, a similar mechanism
may account for the release of increasing amounts of H2O2 in
relation to the degree of roasting. Conversely, it suggests that
roasting may trigger a forced autoxidation process involving
coffee polyphenols. This type of reaction may start long before
the onset of pyrolysis. The extent of autoxidation is bound,
however, to O2 availability. There is no information available
describing oxygen levels in the green coffee bean. Rolletschek
et al. (30) showed that the embryo in legume seeds develops in
a hypoxic environment. In fact, seeds have developed specific
mechanisms to prevent anoxia. One can assume that some O2,
if not much, must be present in green coffee. Nonsymbiotic
hemoglobins, which seem to be widely distributed among plants,
may also act as O2 carriers, releasing O2 at lower partial pressure
(31). One should also consider the possible regeneration of
consumed O2, a mechanism that would promote sustained
oxidative cycling with a minimal amount of O2. At high
temperature, electron acceptors other than O2 may be activated
and radical-driven reactions favored. In fact, negatively staining
proteins, identified as markers of oxidative activity in the green
bean (13), can be traced up to 4-5 min of roasting (Figure 6).
This observation strongly suggests that some type of oxidative
activity affecting polyphenols is maintained during the first half
of the roasting process.
Storage protein isoforms stained positively with Folin-
Ciocalteu’s reagent after 2D-PAGE of green coffee beans (data
not shown), suggesting that the 11S storage protein forms
adducts with polyphenols already before roasting. Its tendency
to stain negatively after incubation in aqueous H2O2 solutions
(Figure 4) supports this suggestion. Hence, a few autoxidative
cycles of protein-attached polyphenols would be sufficient to
draw 11S storage protein isoforms into a phenolic polymeric
structure. Due to the significant moisture level of green beans
(∼12% in weight percent), molecular components of the green
bean have a chance to migrate and interact during roasting. Loss
of moisture proceeds slowly, and moisture level never reaches
zero during roasting (32, 33), probably due to the concomitant
formation of condensation water.
It is clear that the pyrolysis of phenols (caffeic acid in model
systems; 15) and Maillard reaction products (34), be it in the
presence or absence of O2, generate compounds and polymers
that can later form H2O2 by autoxidation. These reactions,
however, proceed at high temperature. Thermal decomposition
of pure CGA including decarboxylation and concomitant release
of CO2 starts at ∼210 °C (35). Da Porto et al. (32) observed a
sharp release of CO2 at ∼200 °C, a temperature corresponding
to a 6 min roast under their roasting conditions (drum roasting,
10-min total roasting time). Considering our roasting experiment
and the dry-processed Santos Arabica sample in particular
Figure 3.
Changes in green coffee protein profiles in green coffee
suspensions, water-soluble fraction. Arabica (Colombia) protein profiles
were followed by 2D-PAGE (Immobiline DryStrip, pH 3−10NL). One gram
of milled green coffee was suspended in 10 mL of H2O2 (37 °C, 24 h).
Range of H2O2 concentrations tested: 0 µM (A) to 979 mM (F). The
acidic curtain of polymers is indicated by an arrow. In (F), the progression
of storage protein isoforms into the acidic polymeric curtain can be clearly
observed (small arrows). Browning of the freeze-dried suspensions was
scored on a relative scale from −(no browning) to ++++ (maximal
browning).
2338
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
Montavon et al.

(Figure 2), we observed clear signs of polymerization after only
2 min of roasting. This time corresponds to an early stage, where
pyrolytic decomposition of CGAs is unlikely to occur. Leloup
et al. (36) showed that as much as 80% of all CGAs were
degraded after 4 min of roasting under their conditions (240
°C, 10-min total roasting time). Nucleophilic addition reactions
involving quinones (already present in the green bean or
generated during roasting), proteins, and carbohydrates may
explain, to some extent, the synchronized disappearance of
CGAs and proteins. Incorporation of proteins into the polymeric
matrix may, however, also proceed via ester, ether, and peroxy
links.
Derivatization of proteins with CGAs is accompanied by a
change of their isoelectric point toward lower pH values (37,
38), potentially explaining the migration of storage protein
isoforms into the acidic polymeric curtain. Storage protein
subunits (R-arm and â-arm; Figure 2) and the polymeric curtain
stained positively with Folin-Ciocalteu’s reagent (data not
shown), suggesting a significant role for polyphenols in the
polymerization process.
Changes in Green Coffee Protein Profiles during Roasting,
Impact of Postharvest Processing. Except for the analysis of
coffee water-soluble compounds during roasting, we did not
use any PVPP to remove phenols from our samples. In a
previous paper (13) we have already observed that oxidation
of coffee samples resulted in fuzzy protein profiles. This could
be ascribed to oxidation of various polyphenols, either free or
protein bound, which may react with the amide carbonyl of the
polyacrylamide matrix or with companion molecules by nucleo-
philic addition. Consequently, quinoproteins are prevented from
migrating properly toward their final position in the two-
dimensional gel. After 2 min of roasting (Figure 2), we observed
similar smearing of protein spots, suggesting that oxidation and
polymerization of polyphenols occurred. Strong differences
among the three postharvest processes were also obvious.
Beans alone are required for the preparation of coffee. Skin,
pulp, mucilage, parchment, silver skin (to some extent), and
water must be removed before storage and roasting. That is what
postharvest processing is all about. Three main processes
commonly used in the coffee world are dry, semidry, and wet
(see Table 1 for details). The dry process is the oldest and
simplest: it consists of drying the cherries, most usually in the
sun, before hulling. The uneven and slow maturation of coffee
cherries (6-8 and 9-11 months for the species of economic
value, C. arabica and C. canephora, respectively) results in the
coexistence of green (usually unripe), red (ripe), and dark red
(over-ripe) cherries on the same tree. Strip harvesting, which is
typical for dry-processed cherries, does not include any form
of classification or selection. Dry-processed coffee is conse-
quently composed of beans representing various maturation
stages. During the wet and semidry processes, pulping is the
essential operation by which the soft pulpy part of the cherry
together with the skin is removed. Pulping machines, to be
effective, have to be fed with cherries of the right texture
corresponding to ripe cherries and must not be fed with
immature beans.
Dry processing is known to be much more aggressive than
wet and semidry processing. The dry process elicits oxidative
Figure 4. Same as Figure 3, but gelatin gels. Negatively staining protein
fragments are in boxes. Storage proteins, especially the R-arm isoforms,
tended to stain negatively in the presence of H2O2 (single arrows). The
polymerization pathway of the R-arm isoforms could be followed at very
high H2O2 levels (E, F; triple arrows).
Figure 5. Same as Figure 3, but the water-insoluble fraction. No large
acidic curtain of polymers could be observed, suggesting that nascent
insoluble polymers (single arrow) become soluble upon further polymer-
ization (compare with Figure 3). As observed for the water-soluble proteins,
the R-arm isoforms appeared to be more reactive than the â-arm isoforms.
Coffee Proteins during Roasting
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
2339

stress and activates polyphenol oxidases. Dry-processed samples
also contain unripe cherries, which appeared to be more prone
to oxidation than ripe cherries (13). Preliminary pulping excludes
the use of unripe cherries in the two other processes. The wet
process also ensures optimal protection against oxidation and
top quality. Large amounts of clean water are, however, required
(40 L/kg of dry parchment coffee). Hence, a mechanical system
was developed in Central America to remove the mucilage from
the beans. This ecological process requires only ∼1 L/kg of
dry parchment coffee and largely preserves the original quality
of the coffee beans. The semidry process was developed in
Brazil with the aim to reduce costs and water pollution. Contrary
to the wet method, it does not include a fermentation step and
beans that are still surrounded by mucilage are dried. Accord-
ingly, protein spots in the semidry-processed sample were sharp,
nearly comparable to those in the wet-processed sample. These
data suggest that the redox status of the green bean does
influence the course and kinetics of melanoidin formation during
roasting.
Changes in Green Coffee Protein Profiles in H2O2 Green
Coffee Suspensions. H2O2 can be considered as a marker for
autoxidation. At the same time, it may trigger autoxidation.
Accordingly, we wanted to address the following question: can
we induce polymerization of storage protein isoforms under mild
conditions (37 °C), where pyrolysis and Maillard reaction do
not occur? We decided to use H2O2 as an oxidizing agent. Green
coffee suspensions were incubated during 24 h in aqueous H2O2
solutions covering a wide range of concentrations. Water-soluble
and water-insoluble fractions of these suspensions were analyzed
separately (Figures 3-5).
Water-Soluble Fractions (Figures 3 and 4). At high concen-
trations, H2O2 promoted the formation of an acidic curtain of
nascent polymers that clearly integrated the isoforms of the R-
and â-arms into their structure (Figure 3C-F). Browning was
observed when polymerization occurred. Storage protein sub-
units migrated toward the acidic end of the gel, suggesting that
strong derivatization precedes polymerization. No polymeriza-
tion was observed at low H2O2 concentration or when H2O2
was omitted (Figure 3A,B).
An increase of neutral to basic low molecular weight proteins
was observed as a result of protein degradation during incubation
(Figure 3). When gelatin was added to the separating gel of
the second-dimensional run, two populations of low molecular
weight (10-20 kDa) negatively staining proteins were identi-
fied (Figure 4). Under oxidative stress, storage protein subunits
seem to be forced into either polymerization (see negative
staining of R-arm in Figure 4E,F, arrows) or fragmentation (see
negative staining of R-arm and fragments in Figure 4B, single
arrows).
In a previous study (13), we identified oxidative stress as
the cause for negative staining. This behavior was attributed to
the conversion of phenol-proteins into quinone-proteins. During
silver staining, quinones may collect the electrons supposed to
reduce protein-bound silver ions to black molecular silver. In
the presence of H2O2, even storage protein subunits tended to
stain negatively (Figure 4B-F), suggesting that these molecules
share some specific structural and functional properties with
negatively staining fragments. The ability of these fragments
to withstand polymerization and to remain as discrete spots on
the gel may be conferred by partial or total saturation of addition
sites on the quinonic rings. At the same time, stabilization of
the quinonic state is achieved, because regeneration of phenols
by addition reactions cannot proceed.
Water-Insoluble Fractions. Insoluble material separated into
sharp spots (Figure 5). A strong acidic shift of storage protein
subunits in the presence of H2O2 was also observed. No acidic
polymeric curtain could be observed, suggesting that insoluble
storage protein isoforms (denatured?) become soluble upon
polymerization. Rawel et al. (38) observed that oxidative
conjugation of CGAs with bovine serum albumin strongly
altered the secondary structure of the protein. Conformational
modifications became more significant upon further derivati-
zation. It is clear that these modifications may have a strong
influence on the solubility of any protein, leading to either
reduced or enhanced solubility according to the type of protein
(38). The grafting of an insoluble protein on a soluble polymeric
structure may also contribute to the masking of exposed
hydrophobic sites and solubilize the protein.
Changes in Green Coffee Protein Profiles during Roasting
(Gelatin Gels). Any specific and reproducible protein degrada-
tion process should be considered as a potential source for
coffee-specific nitrogenous flavor precursors. Consequently, we
decided to trace negatively staining fragments during roasting
by using gelatin gels. Similar fragments were observed in their
usual acidic location. Nonstorage proteins disappeared first.
After 4-5 min of roasting, storage protein subunits and
negatively staining proteins vanished in a synchronized fashion.
It can be deduced from this observation that the 11S storage
protein is the best candidate precursor of negatively staining
fragments. When double staining was performed (first silver
Figure 6. Changes in green coffee protein profiles during roasting followed
by 2D-PAGE (Immobiline DryStrip, pH 4−7). Gelatin gels were used to
trace negatively staining protein fragments. The water-soluble fraction was
analyzed. Total roasting time of Arabica (Colombia) sample was 9 min.
Negatively staining spots were observed during the first half of the roasting
process (ovals). Negatively staining fragments and storage protein isoforms
(gray boxes) vanished in a synchronized fashion.
2340
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
Montavon et al.

and then Coomassie blue), the negatively stained areas turned
blue, indicating that there was no artifact (data not shown). In
a few cases, however, the blue stain did not appear, suggesting
that in situ fragmentation of the corresponding proteins did occur
at some point of the staining process.
In green coffee H2O2 suspensions, negatively staining proteins
accumulated; this was not observed during roasting (Figures 4
and 6). Extra energy provided by the roasting process may favor
a complete and sustained fragmentation process, avoiding
accumulation. Figure 6 illustrates the fate of water-soluble
proteins during roasting. In total extracts (data not shown),
negatively staining proteins and storage proteins could be traced
up to 5.5 min of roasting. Considering a medium roast (∼9 min
of roasting under our conditions), one can assume that sustained
and complete degradation of storage protein subunits proceeded
over more than half of the required roasting time. Similar results
were also obtained with Robusta coffee samples (data not
shown).
The mechanisms driving the fragmentation process are
unclear. Negative staining indicates that oxidation may con-
tribute or even be necessary to achieve fragmentation of 11S
storage protein along this pathway. Negative staining may also
be a coincidental feature that has nothing to do with the
fragmentation mechanism. Pyrolysis and radical-driven frag-
mentation are well-known processes that certainly degrade
proteins during roasting. In our previous study performed at 37
°C, aerobic conditions were required to observe degradation of
the 11S storage protein and release of free amino acids (13).
The similarity of the degradation pathways adopted by the 11S
storage protein under extremely divergent physicochemical
conditions points to a similar degradation mechanism. Poly-
phenol adducts perhaps protect the storage protein against
pyrolysis and radical-driven degradation and force it into an
atypical degradation pathway.
Considerations in Relation with the Physiology of Seeds.
Because similar fragmentation and polymerization processes
were observed at both high (roasting) and low temperatures (37
°C, in solution), the question about their possible physiological
relevance is open. It is well-known that plants respond to
pathogen infection by an oxidative burst (39). Release of ROS
is also associated with germination, the developmental stage
most sensitive to pathogen infection (40). The major ROS
building the oxidative response in plants is H2O2 (41, 42), which
also appears to be a regulator of the reactions studied here. Two-
dimensional protein profiles of beans that had suffered from
water stress or infection by fungi clearly displayed similar
fragmentation and polymerization profiles of the 11S storage
protein (Figure 7). Accordingly, the oxidative burst that
produces high levels of ROS may also be associated with protein
polymerization and fragmentation reactions in seeds. This leads
us to suggest that the coffee storage protein, which is devoted
to the nutrition of the young seedling, may undergo oxidative
fragmentation rather than exclusive enzymatic hydrolysis in the
course of germination. This last point however deserves further
investigation.
In this study, we showed that the 11S storage protein subunits
are integrated into the polymeric structure of melanoidins formed
during roasting. In parallel, negatively staining protein fragments
are released. According to dynamic aspects of our data, they
most likely derive from the 11S storage protein. Our data suggest
that polyphenols bound to subunits of the storage protein
contribute to their characteristic behavior and the formation of
melanoidins. Similar features, polymerization, fragmentation
profiles, and atypical staining, were also observed in green
coffee suspensions incubated at 37 °C. This suggests that
mechanisms other than pyrolysis and the Maillard reaction may
play a role during roasting, in particular during the first half of
the process. We propose that autoxidation of polyphenols
contributes to the formation of melanoidins. Our observations
coincide with data obtained by microbiological and metal-
chelating affinity characterization of melanoidins, indicating that
coffee melanoidins are not just of the Maillard type but also of
the phenol type (43-45). The availability of O2 appears to be
the limiting factor for autoxidation to proceed in the intact bean.
Even though it is almost certain that some O2 is present in the
bean, one should be aware that quinones that were generated
in the green bean can still undergo one cycle of nucleophilic
addition during roasting and in the absence O2.
Polymerization reactions likely to occur during roasting, be
they by autoxidation, pyrolysis, or the Maillard reaction, share
the potential to generate compounds with the capacity to
Figure 7. Oxidative burst in coffee: healthy versus damaged beans were
analyzed by 2D-PAGE (Immobiline DryStrip, pH 3−10NL): (A) healthy
green coffee beans (mature, wet-processed Arabica from Thailand); (B−
D) damaged beans [(B) coated beans, beans that suffered from drought,
they are characterized by a strongly adherent silver skin (origin: Mexico);
(C) Cardinello beans, fungus-infested beans covered with yellowish or
reddish spores (origin: Colombia); (D) black beans, beans with coffee
berry disease (anthracnosis) caused by the fungus Colletotrichum
coffeeanum, renamed C. kahawae (origin: Colombia)].
Figure 8. Proposed reaction scheme of autoxidative mechanisms in coffee.
For details, refer to the text.
Coffee Proteins during Roasting
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
2341

generate H2O2 in solution. We observed that some coffee
extracts can generate H2O2 concentrations well above 1-2 mM
after a couple of hours. The involvement of autoxidation cannot
be questioned here.
In Figure 8, we propose a reaction scheme of autoxidation
in coffee. Two entries are proposed: the melanoidins, which
are known to undergo spontaneous autoxidative processes in
solution, and the polyphenols/CGAs of green coffee, which
might enter the cycle by a heat/roasting- or H2O2-driven
mechanism. Redox cycling promotes nucleophilic addition
reactions and ROS generation. Fragmentation may also be
involved in this type of redox cycling, but this remains to be
confirmed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We express our thanks to E. Prior, C. Yeretzian and H. Watzke
for critical proofreading of the manuscript, and to K. Rade Kukic
for her skillful assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
(1) Maillard, L.-C. Action des acides amine´s sur les sucres; formation
des Melanoidins par voie me´thodique. C. R. Hebd. Seances Acad.
Sci. 1912, 154, 66-68.
(2) Reineccius, G. A. The Maillard reaction and coffee flavor. In
Proceedings of the 16th ASIC Colloquium (Kyoto); ASIC: Paris,
France, 1995; pp 249-257.
(3) Ho, C.-T.; Hwang, H.-I.; Yu, T.-H.; Zhang, J. An overview of
the Maillard reactions related to aroma generation in coffee. In
Proceedings of the 15th ASIC Colloquium (Montpellier);
ASIC: Paris, France, 1993; pp 519-527.
(4) Hodge, J. E. Dehydrated foods, chemistry of browning reactions
in model systems. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1953, 1, 928-943.
(5) Hofmann, T. Studies on the relationship between molecular
weight and the color potency of fractions obtained by thermal
treatment of glucose/amino acid and glucose/protein solutions
by using ultracentrifugation and color dilution techniques. J.
Agric. Food Chem. 1998, 46, 3891-3895.
(6) Hofmann, T. Identification of novel colored compounds contain-
ing pyrrole and pyrrolinone structures formed by Maillard
reactions of pentoses and primary amino acids. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 1998, 46, 3902-3911.
(7) Morales, F. J.; Jime´nez-Pe´rez, S. Free radical scavenging capacity
of Maillard reaction products as related to color and fluorescence.
Food Chem. 2001, 72, 119-125.
(8) Macrae, R. Nitrogenous components. In Coffee, Vol. 1: Chem-
istry; Clarke, R. J., Macrae, R., Eds.; Elsevier Applied Science
Publishers: London, U.K., 1985; pp 137-152.
(9) Rogers, W. J.; Be´zard, G.; Deshayes, A.; Pe´tiard, V.; Marraccini,
P. Biochemical and molecular characterization and expression
of the 11S-type storage protein from Coffea arabica endosperm.
Plant Physiol. Biochem. 1999, 37, 261-272.
(10) Arnold, U.; Ludwig, E.; Ku¨hn, R.; Mo¨schwitzer, U. Analysis of
free amino acids in green coffee beans. Z. Lebensm. Unters.
Forsch. 1994, 199, 22-25.
(11) Ludwig, E.; Lipke, U.; Raczek, U.; Ja¨ger, A. Investigations of
peptides and proteases in green coffee beans. Eur. Food Res.
Technol. 2000, 211, 111-116.
(12) Clifford, M. N. Chlorogenic acids. In Coffee, Vol. 1: Chemistry;
Clarke, R. J., Macrae, R., Eds.; Elsevier Applied Science
Publishers: London, U.K., 1985; pp 153-202.
(13) Montavon, P.; Duruz, E.; Rumo, G.; Pratz, G. Evolution of green
coffee protein profiles with maturation and relation to coffee
cup quality. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2003, 51, 2328-2334.
(14) Stadler, R. H.; Tureski, R. J.; Mu¨ller, O.; Markovic, J.; Leong-
Morgenthaler, P. M. The inhibitory effects of coffee on radical-
mediated oxidation and mutagenicity. Mutat. Res. 1994, 308,
177-190.
(15) Stadler, R. H.; Welti, D. H.; Sta¨mpfli, A. A.; Fay, L. B. Thermal
decomposition of caffeic acid in model systems: Identification
of novel tetraoxygenated phenylindan isomers and their stability
in aqueous solution. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1996, 44, 898-905.
(16) Bjellqvist, B.; Pasquali, C.; Ravier, F.; Sanchez, J.-C.; Hoch-
strasser, D. A nonlinear wide-range immobilized pH gradient
for two-dimensional electrophoresis and its definition in a
relevant pH scale. Electrophoresis 1993, 14, 1357-1365.
(17) Hochstrasser, D. F.; Frutiger, S.; Paquet, N.; Bairoch, A.; Ravier,
F.; Pasquali, C.; Sanchez, J.-C.; Tissot, J.-D.; Bjellqvist, B.;
Vargas, R.; Appel, R. D.; Hughes, G. J. Human liver protein
map: A reference database established by microsequencing and
gel comparison. Electrophoresis 1992, 13, 992-1001.
(18) Hochstrasser, D. F.; Harrington, M. G.; Hochstrasser, A.-C.;
Miller, M. J.; Miller, C. R. Methods for increasing the resolution
of two-dimensional protein electrophoresis. Anal. Biochem. 1988,
173, 424-435.
(19) Hochstrasser, D. F.; Patchornik, A.; Merril, C. R. Development
of polyacrylamide gels that improve the separation of proteins
and their detection by silver staining. Anal. Biochem. 1988, 173,
412-423.
(20) Jennings, A. C. The determination of dihydroxy phenolic
compounds in extracts of plant tissues. Anal. Biochem. 1981,
118, 396-398.
(21) Rinkus, S. J.; Taylor, R. T. Analysis of hydrogen peroxide in
freshly prepared coffees. Food Chem. Toxicol. 1990, 28, 323-
331.
(22) Tsuji, S.; Shibata, T.; Ohara, K.; Okada, N.; Ito, Y. Studies on
the factors affecting the formation of hydrogen peroxide in
coffee. J. Food Hyg. Soc. Jpn. 1991, 32, 504-512.
(23) Cohen, G.; Heikkila, R. E. The generation of hydrogen peroxide,
superoxide radical, and hydroxyl radical by 6-hydroxydopamine,
dialuric acid, and related cytotoxic agents. J. Biol. Chem. 1974,
249, 2447-2452.
(24) Bors, W.; Michel, C.; Saran, M.; Lengfelder, E. The involvement
of oxygen radicals during the autoxidation of adrenalin. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1978, 540, 162-172.
(25) Saito, I.; Matsuura, T.; Inoue, K. Formation of superoxide ion
via one-electron transfer from electron donors to singlet oxygen.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1983, 105, 3200-3206.
(26) Cilliers, J. J. L.; Singleton, V. L. Nonenzymic autoxidative
phenolic browning reactions in a caffeic acid model system. J.
Agric. Food Chem. 1989, 37, 890-896.
(27) Cilliers, J. J. L.; Singleton, V. L. Characterization of the products
of nonenzymic autoxidative phenolic reactions in a caffeic acid
model system. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1991, 39, 1298-1303.
(28) Bielski, B. H. J. Re-evaluation of the spectral and kinetic
properties of HO2 and O2 free radicals. Photochem. Photobiol.
1978, 28, 645-649.
(29) Singleton, V. L. Oxygen with phenols and related reactions in
musts, wines, and model systems: Observations and practical
implications. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 1987, 38, 69-77.
(30) Rolletschek, H.; Borisjuk, L.; Koschorreck, M.; Wobus, U.;
Weber, H. Legume embryos develop in a hypoxic environment.
J. Exp. Bot. 2002, 53, 1099-1107.
(31) Andersson, C. R.; Jensen, E. O.; Llewellyn, D. J.; Dennis, E.
S.; Peacock, W. J. A new hemoglobin gene from soybean: A
role for hemoglobin in all plant. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
1996, 93, 5682-5687.
(32) Da Porto, C.; Nicoli, M. C.; Severini, C.; Sensidoni, A.; Lerici,
C. R. Study on physical and physicochemical changes in coffee
beans during roasting. Note 2. Ital. J. Food Sci. 1991, 197-
207.
(33) Schenker, S.; Handschin, S.; Frey, B.; Perren, R.; Escher, F.
Structural properties of coffee beans as influenced by roasting
conditions. In Proceedings of the 18th ASIC Colloquium (Hel-
sinki); ASIC: Paris, France, 1999; pp 127-135.
(34) Nicoli, M. C.; Anese, M.; Manzocco, L.; Lerici, C. R. Antioxidant
properties of coffee brews in relation to roasting degree. Lebensm.
Wiss. -Technol. 1997, 30, 292-297.
2342
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
Montavon et al.

(35) Small, L. E.; Horrel, R. S. High yield coffee technology. In
Proceedings of the 15th ASIC Colloquium (Montpellier);
ASIC: Paris, France, 1993; pp 719-726.
(36) Leloup, V.; Louvrier, A.; Liardon, R. Degradation mechanisms
of chlorogenic acids during roasting. In Proceedings of the 16th
ASIC Colloquium (Kyoto); ASIC: Paris, France, 1995; pp 192-
198.
(37) Rawel, H. M.; Kroll, J.; Hohl, U. C. Model studies on the
reactions of plant phenols with whey proteins. Nahrung/Food
2001, 45, 72-81.
(38) Rawel, H. M.; Rohn, S.; Kruse, H. P.; Kroll, J. Structural changes
induced in bovine serum albumin by covalent attachment of
chlorogenic acid. Food Chem. 2002, 78, 443-455.
(39) Wojtaszek, P. Oxidative burst:
an early plant response to
pathogen infection. Biochem. J. 1997, 322, 681-692.
(40) Schopfer, P.; Plachy, C.; Frahry, G. Release of reactive oxygen
intermediates (superoxide radicals, hydrogen peroxide, and
hydroxyl radicals) and peroxidase in germinating radish seeds
controlled by light, gibberellin, and abscisic acid. Plant Physiol.
2001, 125, 1591-1602.
(41) Levine, A.; Tenhaken, R.; Dixon, R. A.; Lamb, C. H2O2 from
the oxidative burst orchestrates the plant hypersensitive disease
resistance response. Cell 1994, 79, 583-593.
(42) Sandermann, H. Active oxygen species as mediators of plant
immunity: Three case studies. Biol. Chem. 2000, 381, 649-
653.
(43) Terasawa, N.; Murata, M.; Homma, S. Isolation of a fungus to
decolorize coffee. Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem. 1994, 58,
2093-2095.
(44) Homma, S. Nonvolatile compounds in coffee. Proceedings of
the 18th ASIC Colloquium (Helsinki); ASIC: Paris, France, 1999;
pp 83-89.
(45) Homma, S.; Murata, M. Characterization of metal-chelating
compounds in instant coffee. In Proceedings of the 16th ASIC
Colloquium (Kyoto); ASIC: Paris, France, 1995; pp 249-257.
Received for review July 29, 2002. Revised manuscript received
December 30, 2002. Accepted December 30, 2002.
JF020832B
Coffee Proteins during Roasting
J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 51, No. 8, 2003
2343
