 
 
 
National Coffee Association  
Scientific Affairs White Papers  
MEMBERS ONLY 
 
 
ACRYLAMIDE (AA) 
 
 
What is it?  
 
Everything is composed of chemicals.  Acrylamide (AA) is a naturally-
occurring chemical commonly formed in foods as a result of many different 
types of cooking.  One can assume that ever since fire has been used to 
cook food to high temperatures, AA has potentially been present.  It is also 
worth noting that AA can be man-made (synthetic) and is used for 
industrial purposes including use as a grouting agent or as a building block 
for a polymer known as polyacrylamide.  The polymer is commonly used in 
water and wastewater treatment and in pulp and paper processing as well 
as for scientific research  (gels used in laboratory settings).  The discussion 
herein is limited to AA that occurs in food naturally and is not synthetic or 
intentionally added 
 
How is it formed?  
 
Simply put, AA can be formed in foods when sugars (carbohydrates) 
combine with certain amino acids (building blocks of protein; typically 
asparagine) in the presence of high heat (>120°C or 248°F).  AA is not 
present in the raw ingredients of the various food products in which it is 
found, but can form via a chemical reaction known as the Maillard 
(pronounced – my yard) or “browning” reaction, which is what creates the 
color and flavor associated with frying, broiling, baking, roasting, grilling or 
toasting. 
 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
2 
Why is AA relevant to coffee? 
 
Green coffee does not contain AA, but it does have the building blocks to 
make AA under the right conditions.  As described above, AA can form 
when high-temperature cooking techniques such as roasting are used on 
foods that have amino acids and sugars in them, and roasting coffee is no 
exception.  Importantly, AA is not intentionally added to roasted coffee.  
The formation of AA via the Maillard reaction (see above), which 
contributes to color and flavor, is very difficult to limit because consumers 
have come to expect certain flavors, smells and colors that are created as a 
result of this reaction. Thus, like many other food categories where high-
temperature cooking is necessary, roasted coffee has the challenge of 
trying to reduce the presence of AA while still delivering a product the 
consumers wants to drink. 
 
Key things to know about why AA became a food-related concern:  
 
Prior to 2002, concern over AA and health was mainly related to worker 
exposure associated with its use in industry.  In 2002, scientists in Europe 
were trying to understand how much AA workers might have been exposed 
to while grouting a tunnel in Sweden after there had been some spillage of 
the grouting agent.  They used a technique to measure the concentration of 
AA in the blood in the form of an adduct, which is an association between 
AA and hemoglobin (the molecule that carries the oxygen in our blood).  
They were looking for this in workers who were thought to be exposed to 
AA as a result of the spill as well as a group of workers who had not been 
exposed to the grouting agent. The results were surprising to the 
researchers because they found that the AA blood levels (as indicated by 
the presence of the adduct) were high even in individuals NOT exposed to 
the grouting agent.   The scientists began to wonder where AA in the blood 
might be coming from; that is, what source of AA were people exposed to if 
it was not something in the workplace?  This question led to the finding in 
2002, by the Swedish National Food Administration and Stockholm 
University, that AA was present in food.  
 
Because AA was recognized as a potential health hazard in the industrial 
setting, toxicology studies prior to 2002 had been mainly focused on 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
3 
evaluating human exposure in the workplace, not on risk related to 
ingestion of AA from food.  Scientists knew they would need to 
understand how much AA was in food before they could begin to assess 
what (if any) risk of adverse health effects might be associated with 
exposure. Early analytical work demonstrated AA was present at very low 
levels in many food products (micrograms AA/kilogram of product [µg/kg]; 
this terminology is also known as parts per billion [ppb]1).  Subsequently, 
many entities began developing databases with this type of information, 
including:  
• FDA 
(http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodSafety/FoodContaminantsAdulterati
on/ChemicalContaminants/Acrylamide/default.htm) 
• Health Canada (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/securit/chem-
chim/food-aliment/acrylamide/index-eng.php) 
• European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 
(http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/topics/topic/acrylamide.htm) 
• World Health Organization (WHO) (http://www.acrylamide-
food.org/data_disclaimer.cfm) 
 
Levels of AA in coffee reported by authoritative groups in the public 
domain:   
 
ILSI-Europe - Based on a 2008 publication by an Expert Group 
commissioned by the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) Europe Task 
Force on Process-related foods: 
 
• AA concentrations in roasted and ground coffee (not in the brewed 
coffee that we drink) are on the order of 200 to 300 ppb;  
o Roasted Robusta beans contain greater amounts of AA as 
compared to roasted Arabica beans,  
o Lighter roasts contain higher AA concentrations relative to 
darker roasts.   
o The AA concentration in roasted and ground coffee also tends 
to decrease when it is stored for extended periods of time.   
• AA concentrations in brewed coffee are on the order of 10 to 20 ppb. 
 
                                                        
1 1 ppb is equivalent to ~3 seconds out of a century or ~3 ounces in 100,000 tons. 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
4 
US-FDA- Data collected by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
through 2004 are consistent with the ILSI-Europe data for roasted and 
ground coffee (not brewed); however, the AA concentrations in brewed 
coffee tended to be lower (generally below 10 ppb). 
 
Perspective on other foods:  
Other foods typically identified as containing AA include:  French fries, 
potato chips (crisps), cookies (biscuits) and crackers, crispbreads, breakfast 
cereals, corn chips (crisps) and bread.  Based on the same publication from 
the Expert Group commissioned by the ILSI Europe Task Force, as well as 
data collected by FDA, average AA concentrations in these food groups are: 
 
 
Food 
Average Concentration (ppb) 
Expert Group – ILSI Europe 
FDA 
Potato chips (crisps) 
804 
598 
Crisp breads 
390 
-- 
Cookies (biscuits) and crackers 
360 
-- 
French fries 
339 
698 
Breakfast cereals 
121 
119 
Bread 
22 
-- 
-- = Average values not reported 
    
As discussed above, the AA concentration in brewed coffee is low relative 
to some other foods such as potato chips and French fries.  According to 
the FDA, brewed coffee represents less than 1 percent of American’s 
overall intake of AA from food.    
 
Perspective on health concern:  
 
As summarized by FDA in 2007, AA is carcinogenic in rodents and is 
therefore considered to be a potential carcinogen in humans.  A recent 
evaluation by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives 
(JECFA) in 2010 concluded that the levels of AA in food were of concern 
because estimated human exposures were below, but relatively close to, 
levels resulting in increased cancer risk in rodents (referred to as the 
“margin of exposure” or MOE).  JECFA estimated AA exposures ranging 
from 1 to 4 microgram per kilogram body weight per day (µg/kg-bw-d) for 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
5 
the general population and high-end consumers, respectively.  FDA’s most 
recent estimate for the general population (ages 2 years and older) is 
slightly lower (0.4 µg/kg-bw-d).  AA is also a neurotoxicant (affects the 
nervous system) in humans and a reproductive and developmental toxicant 
in animals; however, AA is considered unlikely to have these effects at 
levels encountered in human foods.  Importantly, there is some 
disagreement in the scientific community as to the relevance of rodent 
studies to humans, as well as the need to consider both the potential risks 
of consuming foods that happen to contain AA weighted against the 
benefits associated with otherwise consuming those foods. 
 
Analytical methods: 
 
Initially, researchers had difficulty analyzing certain foods for AA; however, 
new methods have since been developed and analysis of foods for AA is no 
longer considered an issue. 
 
Mitigation: 
 
Food Drink Europe (FDE) recently released its most recent version of its AA 
toolbox (formerly the CIAA AA toolbox).  The “Toolbox” describes 
intervention steps that may prevent or reduce AA formation in specific 
manufacturing processes and products.  Information is provided for potato-
based products; cereal-based products; coffee, roasted grain and 
substitute; and baby biscuits, infant cereals and baby foods other than 
cereal-based foods.  A total of 14 different parameters (“tools”) are 
grouped into four compartments, i.e., agronomical factors (what can be 
done in the field), food recipe, processing, and final preparation.  With 
regard to coffee, none of the agronomical or food recipe tools are effective 
for reducing AA, and only very limited process options (darker roasts, 
increased storage time) are currently available without affecting the 
consumer acceptance (flavor and aroma) of the product. 
                    
Regulatory perspective: 
 
AA was listed under California’s Safe Drinking Water and Toxics 
Enforcement Act of 1986 (commonly referred to as Proposition or “Prop” 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
6 
65) as a chemical known to the state to cause cancer in January 1990 and 
as a reproductive toxicant in February 2011.  Under Prop 65, businesses 
that knowingly expose individuals to chemicals above what is referred to as 
the “safe harbor level” are generally required to provide warnings to 
citizens of California.  A safe harbor level for cancer effects is referred to as 
a “no significant risk level” (NSRL) and a safe harbor level for reproductive 
effects is referred to as a “maximum allowable dose level” (MADL).  The 
Office of Environmental Health Hazards Assessment (OEHHA), which is a 
division of the California Environmental Protection Agency, has developed 
safe harbor levels for AA of 0.2 micrograms per day (µg/day) and 140 
µg/day based on cancer and reproductive effects, respectively. As of 2012, 
there are several ongoing lawsuits related to AA and Prop 65, including 
coffee; however, agreements have been reached with Kentucky Fried 
Chicken, McDonalds, Wendy’s and Burger King to post warning signs and 
with several potato chip manufacturers to reduce AA levels in their 
products. 
 
U.S. FDA:  The U.S. FDA has been actively addressing AA in food since 2002, 
including developing a sensitive analytical method, analyzing thousands of 
food samples, launching a research program on AA toxicology and 
researching methods to reduce AA in food.  In 2009, FDA solicited 
information from manufacturers on mitigation measures and reductions 
that have been achieved.  As part of a Q&A for the public, FDA does not 
recommend that people stop eating foods that are fried, roasted, or baked, 
but instead adopt a healthy eating plan.  In addition, the FDA provides 
recommendations for reducing exposure to AA, including cooking or frying 
at lower temperatures, frying or toasting to the lightest color acceptable, 
not storing potatoes at low temperatures and soaking fresh cut potatoes in 
water for several minutes before frying. 
 
EU:  In 2007, the EU Commission requested member states to perform a 
three-year monitoring program of AA levels in food and submit the data to 
EFSA.  The EU Commission recommended Member States to continue 
monitoring in 2010, and in 2011, recommended that Member States 
conduct investigations when the AA levels exceed the indicative values 
(defined below).  The Commission will re-assess the situation by December 
2012.  EFSA has published three reports on AA, the latest in 2011 for data 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
7 
collected in 2009.  As noted above, in 2010, JECFA evaluated AA exposure 
from food and the potential for health effects, and concluded that the 
MOEs for current dietary intake of AA indicate a human health concern 
(JECFA had reached the same conclusion in 2005). 
 
Canada:  Health Canada concurs with JECFA’s determination that the 
estimated intake of AA from certain foods may be a human health concern.  
Accordingly, Health Canada recommends limiting food that is high in fat, 
sugar, or salt, and following a healthy eating pattern.  Similar to U.S. FDA, 
Health Canada also provides recommendations for lowering AA exposure. 
 
Signal levels:  Both the Federal Republic of Germany and EU Commission 
have published concentration levels for AA in several different categories of 
food, including coffee.  The German values are referred to as “signal levels” 
and the EU Commission values are referred to as “indicative values.”  If the 
AA concentrations exceed these levels, than further investigation is 
required and mitigation efforts are to be undertaken.  Importantly, as 
noted by the EU Commission, signal levels and indicative values are NOT 
safety thresholds.  The German and EU Commission values for roast coffee 
(not brewed) are 280 µg/kg and 450 µg/kg, respectively; both agencies 
have a value of 900 µg/kg for instant coffee (not brewed). 
 
  
 
    
Looking ahead:   
 
• EU Commission is scheduled to reassess AA levels in food in 2012 
• Canada to release market survey with branded information on AA 
levels (timing unknown) 
• There is a suggestion in Europe that AA mitigation should be part of 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) plans 
 
Want to know more?  
 
Here are some key references that were used to put together this summary  
 
Eurofins (2011) “Acrylamide in Food.”  
www.eurofins.de/media/2361079/acrylamid_en.pdf 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
8 
 
Food Drink Europe Acrylamide Toolbox 2011 (formerly CIAA toolbox), 
September 30, 2011. 
http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/chemicalsafety/contaminants/ciaa_acrylam
ide_toolbox09.pdf 
 
IFIC (2010) “Exploring the Facts and Myths of Acrylamide”  
http://www.foodinsight.org/Blog/tabid/60/EntryId/246/Exploring-the-
Facts-and-Myths-of-Acrylamide.aspx 
 
Lineback et al (2012) “Acrylamide in Foods:  A Review of the Science and 
Future Considerations” Ann. Rev. Food Sci. Technol.  3:10.1–10.21 
 
Mottram et al. (2002) “Acrylamide is formed in the Maillard reaction.”  
Nature, 419(6906):448-9. 
 
Seal et al. (2008) “Risk-benefit considerations of mitigation measures on 
acrylamide content of foods--a case study on potatoes, cereals and coffee.”  
Br J Nutr. 99 Suppl2:S1-S46. 
 
Stadler et al. (2002) “Acrylamide from Maillard reaction products.” Nature, 
419(6906): 449-50. 
 
Stadler & Scholz (2004) “Acrylamide:  An update on current knowledge in 
analysis, levels in food, mechanisms of formation and potential strategies 
of control” Nutrition Reviews 62(12):  449-467. 
 
 
 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
9 
Key Milestones (timeline) re:  AA in Food 
 
Apr-02 
Occurrence of AA in foods first reported by scientists from the 
Swedish National Food Authority and University of Stockholm 
Nov-02 
German government issues first signal value for AA in roast 
coffee (not brewed) (370 ppb) 
Oct-02 
Stadler et al. and Mottram et al. discover that AA is formed in 
the Maillard reaction between amino acids (e.g., asparagine) 
and reducing sugars 
Nov-03 
HEATOX project initiated (project duration of 40 months) 
involved 24 partners in 14 countries.  Main objective:  estimate 
health risk that may be associated with hazardous compounds 
in heat treated food and to find cooking/ processing methods 
which minimize the amounts of these compounds, thereby 
providing safe, nutritious and high quality foodstuffs.   
Feb-05 
JECFA meets to discuss risk assessment on AA  
Mar-05 
OEHHA proposes to modify the Prop 65 NSRL for AA of 0.2 
µg/day (adopted in 1990) to 1.0 µg/day. 
Mar-06 
OEHHA withdraws proposed Prop 65 NSRL for AA because too 
much time had elapsed since public meeting 
May-06 
FDA publishes latest AA exposure assessment 
Jul-06 
FDA publishes latest data on AA concentrations in food 
Aug-05 
Proposition 65 lawsuit filed by the State of California against 
multiple defendants regarding AA in potato products 
Sep-06 
Revision 6 of CIAA AA Toolbox released (1st publicly available 
version?) 
Apr-07 
Final HEATOX project summary released.   Results summarized 
for:  formation and processing, analysis, hazard 
characterization, exposure assessment and risk assessment 
and risk characterization, resulting in more than 60 
publications.  Primary conclusions:  (1) exposure to AA poses a 
higher estimated risk compared with many regulated food 
carcinogens, (2) other compounds formed during cooking (~50 
identified) may also constitute an increased risk, and (3) 
implementing recommended mitigation strategies may reduce 
AA exposure on the order of 40%. 
May 2008 
FDA publishes AA Q&As, including recommendation that 

National Coffee Association | Scientific Affairs White Papers  | Members Only 
10
people should not stop eating foods that are fried, roasted or 
baked 
Jan-09 
Codex Alimentarius adopts Code of Practice for reduction of 
AA in foods 
Feb-10 
JECFA updates AA risk assessment 
Apr-10 
Council for Education and Research on Toxics (CERT) files 
Proposition 65 lawsuit against 15 retailers that serve brewed 
coffee 
Nov-10 
German government issues updated signal values for AA in 
roast and instant coffee (280 ppb and 900 ppb, respectively) 
2011 
Draft report of NTP 2-year chronic study of AA in drinking 
water in rats and mice 
Jan-11 
EC publishes indicative values for AA in the majority of food 
categories identified in Recommendation 2010/307/EU, which 
supersede German signal values, including for roast and 
instant coffee (450 ppb and 900 ppb, respectively). 
Mar-11 
OEHHA adopts MADL for AA under Proposition 65 (140 
µg/day); effective April 29, 2011. 
May-11 
CERT files second Proposition 65 lawsuit against >30 roasters 
and retailers that manufacture or sell roast coffee in packages 
Sep-11 
FDE (formerly known as CIAA) releases most recent version of 
AA Toolbox 
Jun-12 
FDE releases updated pamphlets on AA mitigation (promoting 
“as low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA) concept 
 
