0022-1767/85/1352-82Os$02.00/0 
THE JOURNAL 
OF IMMUNOLOGY 
Copyright 0 1985 by The American  Association of Immunologists 
Vol. 135. No. 2. August 1985 
Printed in U.S.A. 
NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR RECEPTORS: A PSYCHOSOMATIC NETWORK 
CANDACE B. PERT,‘* MICHAEL R. RUFF,+ RICHARD J. WEBER,+ AND MILES HERKENHAM’ 
From the  ’Section  on  Brain  Biochemistry, 
Clinical Neuroscience  Branch. National Institute of Mental Health, ‘Cellular 
Immunology Section,  Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology,  National Institute of Dental Research, National Institutes 
of Health,  and  ‘Laboratory of Neurophysiology, National Institute of Mental Health,  Bethesda, MD 20205 
A major conceptual shift in neuroscience has been 
wrought by the realization that brain function is 
modulated by numerous chemicals in addition to 
classical neurotransmitters. Many of 
these infor- 
mational substances are neuropeptides, originally 
studied in other contexts as hormones, “gut pep- 
tides,” or growth factors. Their number presently 
exceeds 50 and most, if not all, alter behavior and 
mood states, although only endogenous analogs of 
psychoactive drugs like morphine,  Valium, 
and 
phencyclidine have been well appreciated in this 
context. We  now realize that their signal specificity 
resides in receptors (distinct classes of recognition 
molecules), rather  than  the close juxtaposition oc- 
curring at classical synapses. Rather precise brain 
distribution patterns for  many neuropeptide recep- 
tors have been determined. A number of brain loci, 
many  within  emotion-mediating 
brain areas,  are en- 
riched  with  many types of neuropeptide receptors 
suggesting a convergence of information at these 
“nodes.“  Additionally, 
neuropeptide receptors occur 
on mobile cells of the immune system: monocytes 
can chemotax to numerous neuropeptides via  proc- 
esses shown by structure-activity analysis to be 
mediated by distinct receptors indistinguishable 
from those found in brain. Neuropeptides and  their 
receptors thus join the brain, glands, and immune 
system in a network of communication between 
brain and body,  probably representing the biochem- 
ical substrate of emotion. 
The ongoing explosion in the recognized number of 
behavior-modifying chemicals  present in  brain  has rev- 
olutionized the theoretical framework of neuroscience. 
Many newly identified neuromodulators are neuropep- 
tides, Le., short, signal  peptides,  which  upon  enzymatic 
cleavage from their polypeptide precursors, produce re- 
ceptor-mediated  behavioral  effects. As we shall  see,  the 
term “neuropeptide” now includes many 
peptides de- 
scribed originally in  other seemingly unrelated  contexts 
as “hormones” (e.g.. insulin) or “growth factors” (e.g., 
transferrin). We will describe the defining features of 
neuropeptides,  emphasizing  their pattern of receptor dis- 
tribution  throughout the  brain  and body in a  network of 
potential  information  exchange  among 
the  brain,  glands, 
and-as 
recent work from our  laboratory 
demon- 
strates-the  immune  system. 
A number of mood modifying drugs, including mor- 
‘Send reprint requests to Candace B. Pert, Ph.D., Chief, Section on 
Brain Biochemistry. Clinical Neuroscience  Branch. National Institute of 
ton, DC 20205-1000. 
Mental  Health, Building 10, Room 3N256,9000 
Rockville Pike,  Washing- 
phine (1). Valium (2). and phencyclidine (angel dust) (3, 
4). have been shown to act by mimicking receptor inter- 
actions  with endogenous neuropeptide ligands. Because 
a vast psychopharmacologic literature (5) rigorously doc- 
uments that drugs which modify observable behavior 
simultaneously alter perception, 
memory storage, and 
mood, we can  thus surmise that neuropeptides have a 
physiologic  role in  the regulation of behavior and emo- 
tional  tone. Biochemical strategies for labeling brain  re- 
ceptors can reveal the specific neuroanatomical sites 
containing  the target receptor molecules where behav- 
ioral alterations  are  initiated.  Thus,  brain/drug 
receptors 
now form an experimentally  accessible  link between the 
classical scientific system 
of knowledge spanning the 
disciplines of psychology, ethology, and neuroanatomy 
and  the more recently evolved system of knowledge en- 
compassing biochemistry, immunology, and molecular 
biology. Chemical neuroanatomy has become an exciting 
level of inquiry  into  nervous  system  function 
as it brings 
behavior and molecules into  the  same  hierarchy 
of 
knowledge. 
Strategy  for  validating  brain  receptor  binding. 
Unfor- 
tunately, chemical purification of the receptors where 
drugs  and endogenous brain  chemicals  initiate  their  ef- 
fects on behavior has proceeded at a  frustratingly slow 
pace. The  strategy of examining  a  number of chemical 
analogs for their  comparative ability to displace binding 
of radiolabeled receptor ligands and produce behavioral 
or  other physiologic alterations has therefore proved an 
important  strategy for providing a rigorous link between 
biochemistry and behavior. For example. numerous  syn- 
thetic and semisynthetic opiate alkaloids and peptides 
have been shown  to displace the binding of radiolabeled 
naloxone from brain membranes and brain slices 
pre- 
pared for autoradiography  with the identical  (p < 0.001) 
rank  and absolute  orders of potency displayed by these 
chemicals  in  raising  analgesic  thresholds  in  rodent 
be- 
havioral tests (6, 7) and  suppressing electrically induced 
contractions of the guinea pig ileum (8). In other words, 
“weak”  opiates,  e.g.,  those  enantiomers of natural mor- 
phine with the “wrong” three-dimensional structure for 
binding to receptors,  simultaneously  require doses sev- 
eral  orders of magnitude higher to elicit their  pharmaco- 
logic effects and to  inhibit receptor binding. All radioli- 
gand binding visualized on brain sections (Fig. 1) has 
been demonstrated to be displaced by the appropriate 
concentrations of numerous  drugs  and/or peptides. 
Neuropeptide  receptors,  behavioral  function,  and 
classical  neurocircuitry:  focus  on  opiate  receptor. 
Stud- 
ies of opiate  receptor  distribution  using 
this  strategy  have 
suggested that receptors throughout the neuroaxis are 
820s 

NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR 
 
RECEPTORS 
821s 
chemically  identical (9, 10)  but  mediate  different  func- 
tions depending  upon  their  neuroanatomical 
locus. Be- 
cause performing well-controlled rodent behavioral ex- 
periments is much more time  consuming than obtaining 
complete neuroanatomical  maps of receptor  distribution, 
only a very small percentage of the opiate (and other 
neuropeptide)  receptors visualized can be confidently as- 
signed to the mediation of specific  behaviors. Comparison 
of the  patterns of brain  receptor  distribution  with  pat- 
terns of radiolabeled neuronal projections have allowed 
us to surmise  in  one  case  that 
opiate  receptors are asso- 
ciated with previously defined  neuroanatomical  circuitry 
(1 1). A network of neurons  are strategically placed for 
communication  among  five  distinct 
brain  areas (olfactory 
bulb,  amygdala, habenula,  interpeduncular  nucleus, and 
specific  cellular  groups  in the lower brain  stem  reticular 
activating area). Behavioral experiments have 
proven 
that these areas are 
associated with olfaction, strong 
emotional memories, and overt sexual expression. For 
example,  observations of mating behavior in rodents  with 
lesions reveal that intact  neurocircuitry  in this five-link 
circuit is required for expression of normal  mating be- 
havior patterns. It is worth  emphasizing that analogous 
neuroanatomical  circuitry can be readily identified in the 
brains of all  mammals. Thus, opiate-induced  alterations 
in sexual  behavior of laboratory  rodents (12,  13) parallel 
those reported in the biologic psychiatry literature de- 
scribing  heroin and methadone  opiate abusers. 
Focus on  insulin  receptor. Recent  studies of the dis- 
tribution of validated ‘251-insulin binding to insulin re- 
ceptors in rat brain have also 
revealed an association 
with  classical  neurocircuitry  implicated, in this  case,  in 
the  function of eating (1 4). Moreover, insulin  receptors 
are clearly not  uniformly  distributed over brain  capillar- 
ies,  but  also can be visualized in strikingly  discrete  pat- 
terns which coincide with  classical layered fields of den- 
dro- and axodendritic  connections (e.g., substantia gela- 
tinosa  layer of the  spinal cord)  (14). Thus,  although  his- 
torically first known as a hormonal  secretion of pancreas 
and a growth factor,  insulin, which is indeed present  in 
the  brain (15), is a  neuropeptide  capable of modulating 
behavior (1 6). 
Fundamental  feature  ofneuropeptide  receptors-en- 
richment at  “nodal  points”: nodal points  in  the limbic 
system of brain. A fundamental  feature  shared by all 
neuropeptide  receptors  whose 
brain distribution has 
been well studied is profound enrichment  at a  number of 
the  same  brain  areas. 
Many of these neuropeptide recep- 
tor-rich areas  can be found  within an intercommunicat- 
ing conglomerate of brain  structures classically  termed 
“the limbic system,”  (17, 18). which is considered  to me- 
diate  emotional behavior: in  unanesthetized  humans  un- 
dergoing brain  stimulation as a preclude to  surgery for 
epilepsy,  far-ranging  emotional  expression  can  be 
elicited 
by stimulation of cortex near  the amygdala, the core of 
the limbic system.  The  amygdala, as well as the hypo- 
thalamus  and  other limbic system-associated structures, 
were found initially to be enriched  in  opiate  receptors  in 
monkey (19) and  human  brain (20). Later  maps of nu- 
merous  other  neuropeptide  receptors in brain  [including 
substance P (21). bombesin (22). cholecystokinin (CCK) 
(23).  neurotensin  (24).  insulin  (14) and  transferrin  (25)j 
have  continued  to  implicate the amygdala and other lim- 
bic system-associated structures (e.g.. the cingulate cor- 
tex) as a  source of receptor-rich  sites  where mood pre- 
sumably is biochemically modified. 
Some other nodal points in the CNS: dorsal horn of 
the  spinal cord and  the  periaqueductal  gray  matter. 
A 
generalization first used to describe  autoradiographic  dis- 
tribution of opiate  receptors in rat  brain  (1 l), but equally 
applicable  to that of most (if not all) neuropeptide recep- 
tors is enrichment at  areas within the CNS where incom- 
ing, sensory  information is processed. Thus,  the dorsal 
horn of mammalian spinal cord (Fig. 1, a) where neurons 
transmitting information from glands, skin, and other 
peripheral  organs  make  their first  synaptic  contact  with 
the  central nervous  system, is enriched  with virtually all 
neuropeptide receptors. Although it has not previously 
been considered part of the limbic system, neuropeptide 
receptors  here, as postulated for other  sensory  way-sta- 
tions (26). may filter and prioritize incoming sensory 
information so that  the whole organism’s perception is 
most compatible with  survival. 
Another neuropeptide receptor-rich locus in  the CNS 
where  peripheral  information is integrated  to modulate 
sensory  thresholds is the periaqueductal  gray region of 
the brain stem. This brain stem area has 
been well 
studied as a site where exogenous opiate analgesia is 
mediated (27). It is in direct  synaptic  communication  with 
descending  processes from the most  recently evolved por- 
tion of mammalian brain, the  frontal cortex (Fig. 1,  c), 
and is thus thought to mediate the well-documented ef- 
fect of expectation and conscious control on pain percep- 
tion (28). Virtually every neuropeptide  tested by microin- 
jection through cannulae placed in this region has sig- 
nificant effects on pain thresholds. Neurotensin, 
bom- 
besin (22),  bradykinin, VIP (29). CCK (23), calcitonin (30), 
and  substance P have  all been shown  to modulate pain 
thresholds  in  rodents  (31). and receptors for these neu- 
ropeptides are found  throughout this  brain  area,  each  in 
its own unique and reproducible pattern. 
Nodal points  in  the  body-outside  the 
CNS. Neuro- 
peptides and their  receptors can be found  throughout the 
body as well as brain.  The  entire  gastrointestinal  tract, 
for example is lined with networks of morphologically 
identifiable neuropeptide-containing cells and  their re- 
ceptors, which generally share similar specificity with 
receptors  in  brain.  The human  testis is as rich  a  source 
of messenger RNA for the opiate peptide proopiomelano- 
cortin as  the pituitary gland (32). A large body of inter- 
disciplinary (endocrinology/physiologic psychology) lit- 
erature  demonstrates  that, to cite one well-studied ex- 
ample, food appetite can be influenced by opiatergic mod- 
ulation (33). partially by acting at pancreatic  opiate  re- 
ceptors  (34)  in the periphery. A direct neuronal  connec- 
tion has been demonstrated between the  pancreas  and 
the  nucleus ambiguous,  a  small  brain  stem 
structure rich 
in some neuropeptide  receptors. However, it is now quite 
clear that classical  synaptic  “hookups” are not necessary 
for  communication between distant  sites within the or- 
ganism,  or even within the  brain. 
Numerous recent  studies  have  shown 
that it is the rule 
rather  than  the 
exception that  sites of neuropeptide  stor- 
age in brain lack physical juxtaposition  with  their recep- 
tors: thus  the classical, closely juxtaposed  synapse be- 
tween the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and its recep- 
tor  on  skeletal  muscle is not at all typical of neuropep- 
tides. Classical synaptic  neurotransmission produces in- 

822s 
NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR RECEPTORS 
1 
. ,  
. .  
b 
Rhesus Monkey 
Naloxone 
a 
IU I 
i.IFc 
I t  
4. 
f 
I
.
 
d 
- 
I 
Cryostat-cut sections of fresh frozen brains were thaw-mounted onto slides. dried. and then incubated in 
uitro in solutions containing 
I3H]- 
Figure I .  Autoradiographic localization of receptors (59) in  the brains of rat (d) (60). rhesus monkey (a to c. e) (61. 62) and  human (f) (63. 64). 
naloxone  to  mark  opiate  receptors  (a  to  dl,  [3H]neurotensin  to  mark  neurotensin  receptors  [e),  and 
i3H]diazepam to  mark  benzodiazepine  receptors (f). 
The  specific  distributions  are visualized by darkfield  microphotography of the  sections  coated  with a tritium-sensitive  emulsion.  in  which  reduced 
silver  grains  show  up 
collectively as whitish  areas (a. d). or by computer-generated  spectral coloring of densitometry  data (59) digitized from  tritium- 
sensitive film (b.  c.  e. f). in  which  reds  and yellows code areas with  dense  receptors,  green  intermediate,  and  blue 
low density (color bar  shown  in  e). 
Thematically,  a to c  show  three "nodal" points  in  rhesus  monkey  brain.  Opiate  receptors  are  dense  in  the  dorsal  horn 
of the  spinal cord (a). the 
primary  sensory  (pain)  inputs  (a],  motivational  (limbic]  processing  (b). 
as well as higher  cortical  control of both (c).  The  remaining  autoradiographs 
(d 
hypothalamus  and  amygdala  (b).  and  in  frontal  association  and limbic cortex  (c).  These  represent possible sites  where  neuropeptides  can  influence 
chemical and  anatomical  features  in  an  effort  to  understand  the  unique 
role that  the  striatum  plays  in  behavioral  function. 
to f )  show  three  different  receptor  systems  in  the  corpus  striatum 
of three  different  species.  Specific  distribution  patterns  can  be  correlated  with  other 

NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR RECEPTORS 
823s 
formation transfer very rapidly on  a  time  scale  measured 
in milliseconds. The  separate discipline of endocrinology 
has featured  a  general  theoretical  framework  in which 
peptide hormones  are  synthesized,  stored,  and released 
from one organ 
while acting elsewhere, the clarity of 
communication residing in 
the specificity of receptors 
rather  than physical  juxtaposition. Neuropeptides prob- 
ably share  an analogous  communication  principle, with 
receptors  serving as targets for circulating levels of neu- 
ropeptides,  themselves produced at other loci in the  brain 
and body. Thus, intercellular  communication  throughout 
networks of neuropeptide-rich  nodes  which  extend from 
the brain to the 
endocrine and, as we shall see, the 
immune  system may integrate the  internal milieu of the 
whole organism. 
Neuropeptides as the  biochemicals 
of 
emotion. 
Charles Darwin (35) assumed  that  the physiologic basis 
of emotions-so 
invariant  and identifiable in  humans of 
all  cultures as well as other primates-would 
one day be 
understood. The  striking  patterns of neuropeptide recep- 
tor  distribution  in 
mood-regulating areas of brain, as well 
as their role in mediating  communication  throughout the 
whole organism,  makes  neuropeptides  the obvious can- 
didates for the biochemical mediation of emotion. Does 
each  neuropeptide  bias  information  processing uniquely 
when occupying receptors at nodal points within 
the 
brain  and body? If so, each  unique  neuropeptide’s  “tone” 
might produce a typical mood state.  The opiate peptides 
clearly mediate a state of intensely  reinforcing  pleasure, 
while substance P release has been associated  with  pain 
(21) and indeed has a reciprocal relationship with opi- 
atergic neurons at most levels of the neuroaxis (36). 
Microinjections of the neuropeptide  angiotensin 
I1 
through  narrow cannulae implanted precisely in  the  an- 
giotensin  receptor-rich  subfornical  organ 
of rat  brain  (37) 
induces  drinking behavior in  seconds, while angiotensin 
receptors in the kidney with the identical  structure-activ- 
ity relationship of those in brain  (37)  apparently  mediate 
retention of water from the kidney’s collecting tubules. 
Thus, enhanced angiotensinergic tone appears associ- 
ated  with thirst  and  the conservation of water at several 
levels in the whole organism. More typically, neurotensin 
is a  neuropeptide  with very little  known  about its  func- 
tional role; it has  the typical neuropeptide receptor dis- 
tribution  in  brain,  similar  receptors in kidney (38). and 
the ability to simulate histamine secretion 
from mast 
cells (39). Although experimental  observations  have been 
confined  to a demonstration that neurotensin  receptors 
on dopamine-secreting neurons modify some locomotory 
behavior in rats (40). we have no clue regarding the mood 
state induced by increased  neurotensinergic  tone at nodal 
points. 
Neuropeptides  in  the  immune  system. We have uti- 
lized these  examples  from the nervous  system  to develop 
the concept that neuropeptides and  their receptors form 
a  network 
of information  exchange  which  extends 
throughout  the  brain  and body, including the immune 
system. For some neuropeptides, such  as neurotensin. 
more information is available on their role in  regulating 
mast cell histamine release than their function in the 
brain.  Other neuropeptides  have only recently been stud- 
ied for their effects on 
immunologic parameters. An 
emerging  literature  indicating a role for opiate  peptides 
in  immune  function  (41) has encouraged us to consider 
the effects of other neuropeptide ligands which effect 
mood and behavior. 
The benzodiazepines, including the drugs Librium and 
Valium widely prescribed for their  anti-anxiety  and 
sleep-inducing  effects,  act at receptor molecules in the 
brain  and periphery  (42) which normally serve as recep- 
tors  for an endogenous anxiety-producing octadecaneu- 
ropeptide whose structure has very recently been se- 
quenced (2). The evidence that the pharmacologically 
relevant  receptors for radiolabeled diazepam [Valium) are 
indeed being mapped (Fig. 1, f )  is provided  by a  correla- 
tion (p < 0.001) between the dose of a  series of diazepam 
analogs  in  alleviating  anxiety in humans  and inhibiting 
binding to brain receptors. 
We have recently demon- 
strated specific benzodiazepine receptor binding on a B 
cell hybridoma with  identical  structure-activity displace- 
ment profiles previously documented on a number of 
other  non-neuronal cells. In this  case,  the rigorous dem- 
onstration of stereospecific benzodiazepine receptor 
binding (Fig. 2) has come before the identification of a 
clear immunomodulatory effect, which has yet to be de- 
scribed. We have  also  shown that  human monocytes, in 
a classical Boyden chamber  assay,  chemotax in response 
to low concentrations of benzodiazepines (Fig. 3; Refer- 
ence  43) and  that  this response is completely blocked by 
the  antagonist for this receptor, PK-11195. 
Human monocytes will chemotax toward low concen- 
trations of a  number of neuropeptides,  including  opiates 
(44,  45).  substance 
P (46),  and bombesin (47).  The recep- 
tors  mediatingchemotactic  processes  appear 
to be similar 
if not identical to previously characterized  brain recep- 
tors,  sharing  appropriate 
structure-activity  relationships 
in chemotactic potency as well as complete blockade of 
chemotactic affects by specific pharmacologic antago- 
nists. For example,  opiate receptor-mediated chemotaxis 
(Fig. 4) is triggered by opiate peptides but only weakly, if 
at all, by opiate alkaloids. Opiate peptide-induced chem- 
otaxis is stereospecifically and completely blocked by the 
active opiate antagonist (-)-naloxone but  unaffected by 
the  same (1 0-8 M) concentration of its pharmacologically 
CONCENTRATION (M) 
F i g u r e 2  Displacement of I3H]-Ro5-4864 binding to LK35.2 cells by 
unlabeled  benzodiazepines. LK35.2 cells (65) were  cultured  in 
RPMI-1640 
media supplemented  with  10%  fetal 
bovine serum.  1 x nonessential  amino 
acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate. 2 mM [.-glutamine and 5 X 
8-mercap- 
toethanol. Cells were  washed twice in 0.05 M Tris.  0.15 M NaCI.  pH 7.4, 
and were suspended in a total 
volume of 0.5 ml of the same buffer. 
Displacement potencies of Ro5-4864, PK-I 1195.  diazepam.  and  clona- 
zepam  were  determined by incubating  cells  with 2 nM I3H]Ro5-4864 in 
the  presence  or  absence 
of various  concentrations of cold ligands  ranging 
from 
to lo-’ M. After a 30-min  incubation  at 
4°C the cells were 
fiber  filters (Whatman GF/C) followed by washing twice with 4 ml of cold 
assayed for I3H]Ro5-4864 binding by rapid  vacuum  filtration over glass 
(4°C) buffer.  The  displacement  curves  shown are  the  total  percentage of 
triplicate  determinations of I3H]Ro5-4864 binding  occurring  in  the  pres- 
ence of each  drug over the indicated  concentration  ranges. 

824s 
NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR RECEPTORS 
(11.7M.l) 
** 
+ 
+ 
PK-11195 
PK-11195 
110-UMI 
IlU'Wl 
monocytes (43). Chemotaxis assays were  performed by using modified 
Figure 3. Benzodiazepine receptor-mediated chemotaxis 
of human 
Boyden chambers as described (43, 45) in  which  the  upper  and lower 
compartments  were  separated by 5-pM pore sized polycarbonate  filters. 
Migration was  assessed  after a 90-min  incubation  at 37°C. Cells were 
enumerated  after  fixing  and  stainingusingan  image  analyzer  bycountlng 
three  fields  in  triplicate.  Data  are  expressed as a migration  index.  The 
number of migrating  cells  in the  buffer  alone  controls  was  40 
cells/field 
(200~). 
Values shown  represent  the  mean  and 
SEM of four  experiments. 
cant  responses  compared  to  control (*+, p c 0.001 
1. Clonazepam.  a  ben- 
Ro5-4864.  [4-chlordiazepam).  and  diazepam 
yielded statistically  signifi- 
in  this  assay.  These  receptor-mediated  events  were 
blocked by the  appro- 
zcdiazepine  analog  with low activity on non-neural  cells,  was  not  active 
priate  antagonist,  PK-11195,  when co-mixed with the agonist  Ro5-4864 
or diazepam.  The  response of the tripeptide, f-Met-Leu-Phe (FMLP) was 
not  inhibited  when co-mixed with  equimolar (lo-' M) PK-11195. 
"O.L 
1o.ot 
Melenkephalm U 
pendorphm - 
Dynorphin [i-l3] bd 
Bremazocine t. 
Morphine - 
Dexlrallorphan W 
Levalhrphan M 
o 10-13 
 
10-11 
10-9 
10-7 
MOLAR 
Figure 4. Chemotactic  response of human monocytes  to  opiates and 
opiate  peptides (451. Chemotaxis was performed as described  in  Flgure 2. 
analogs  occurred at lo-' M. although  the  peptides  @-endorphin, 
D-Ala-D- 
Data is expressed as a  stimulation  index.  The  maximal  response for all 
The EGO for these agents was 
5 X 10"' 
M. These responses were 
Leu enkephalin,  and  dynorphin 11-13) were  similarly  active at 10"' 
M. 
stereospecifically  reversed by naloxone (45). Stereospecificity is demon- 
strated  in  this  figure 
by levallorphan,  which  shows  intermediate  activity 
compared to opiate peptides, while its enantiomer, dextrallorphan. 
is 
inert.  The  stimulation  index  for  the  chemotactic  peptide f-Met-Leu-Phe. 
10" M. was 14.2. 
inert optical isomer (45). 
The  existence of distinct,  discrete  neuropeptide recep- 
tors on human monocytes is further suggested by the 
finding that chemotaxis can only be blocked or antago- 
nized with the  appropriate selective antagonist  for a given 
neuropeptide receptor class. For example,  chemotaxis via 
the f-Met-Leu-Phe receptor, while antagonized by specific 
f-Met-Leu-Phe antagonists, is not  affected by the opiate 
(45) or benzodiazepine (43) receptor antagonists naloxone 
or PK- 
1 1 195, respectively. The physiologic significance 
of this elegant in  vitro model system is yet to be convinc- 
ingly identified: however, the existence of neuropeptide 
receptors on monocytes, known  to  interface  with  numer- 
ous components of the immune  system and body, sug- 
gests an exciting potential substrate for mediating  inter- 
actions  between the  brain  and  immune  system. 
The  penetration of immune and endocrine  systems by 
cells and products of the  nervous system appears to be 
mutual. Thus, cells and products of the immune  system 
exist  in close physical, as well as communicative,  contact 
with the nervous and endocrine  systems  (see E. Blaloch 
and D. Felton, this volume). Hemopoietic stem cells have 
been identified in the CNS (48), and  the  brain, only 10% 
of whose cells are  neurons, is extensively populated by 
cells of macrophage  derivation, the microglia. Other glial 
cells produce, in situ, hormones such as IL-1 (49, 50) 
which  have been largely studied as immunologic factors. 
IL-1 has profound effects on CNS function, including 
thermoregulation and sleep  induction, and therefore may 
have receptor sites  within the CNS where it may function 
as a neuropeptide. Immune  hormones, like the interleu- 
kins  or  interferons, 
may be precursors  for peptides which 
act within the  brain to  also  alter behavior. Macrophages 
are capable of transition from one body compartment to 
another  and  as  such could serve as a kind of "mobile 
synapse," conveying information from one body com- 
partment to another through  a physical translocation, a 
concept commonly applied to  intra-immune  system com- 
munication (51). 
Conclusion. Clearly, the conceptual division between 
the sciences of immunology, endocrinology, and psychol- 
ogy/neuroscience is a historical  artifact: the existence of 
a communicating network of neuropeptides and their 
receptors provide a link among the body's cellular de- 
fense  and repair  mechanisms,  glands,  and  brain. Roth 
and colleagues (52) have  emphasized that neuropeptides 
and their receptors are highly conserved in evolution. 
Opiate peptides (53) and insulin (54) have been identified 
in  unicellular  organisms. Thus, neuropeptides  have been 
a  stable  feature mediating intercellular communication 
throughout evolution. In higher animals  they  have  unique 
neuroanatomical  distributions which allow us to conceive 
of them as biochemical mediators of the emotions. As- 
suming that their  function as well as their  structure is 
conserved in evolution, then even the most primitive 
organisms  must utilize neuropeptides to bias  behaviors 
toward those  with  the  greatest  survival 
value. The  func- 
tional integration of the body's cells (55) through net- 
works of neuropeptides and  their receptors (56) would be 
expected to  be  critical to the  health of the organism as a 
whole. An older psychologic literature (57), 
recently be- 
ginning  to receive more attention (58), 
suggests that emo- 
tional states  can significantly  alter the course and out- 
come of biologic illnesses previously considered to be 
strictly  in the somatic  realm. 
Acknowledgments. We are grateful for Mrs. Sharon 
Morgan's skillful and dedicated preparation of this  man- 
uscript. We acknowledge helpful discussions with Drs. 
Birgit Zipser and  Joanna Hill during  the  preparation of 
this  manuscript. 
Note  Added in Proof: F. 0. Schmitt has thoroughly and 
elegantly summarized (66) the recent conceptual shift 
that  has occurred in  neuroscience  due to the expansion 

NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR 
 
RECEPTORS 
825s 
of recognized neuromodulators or informational sub- 
rat brain: visualization by tritium-sensitive film. Peptides 3:757. 
theoretical work contains some similar viewDoints on the 
ship  to iron distribution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. In Dress. 
stances,” particularly the neuropeptides- This important 
receptors in rat brain: their 
neuropeptide-like pattern and relation- 
25. Hill. J. M., M. R. Ruff, R. J. Weber. and C.  B. Pert. 1985.  Transferrin 
evo~utionary stability of neuropeptides, 
26. Lewis. M. E.. M. Mishkin, E. Bragin, R. M. Brown. C.  B. 
Pert, and A. 
Pert. 1981. Opiate receptor 
gradients in monkey cerebral cortex: 
corresoondence  with 
sensorv OrocessinLr heirarchies. Science 
tic” modes of communication between noncontiguous 
0 
neurons  made possible by receptor specificity. 
I 
< .  
21 1:1 i66. 
27. Pert, A., and T. Yaksh. 1974. Sites of morphine-induced  analgesia 
1 .  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
REFERENCES 
Pert, A., C. B. Pert, G. Davis, and W. E. Bunney, Jr. 1981. Opiate 
peptides and  brain  function. In Handbook of Biological Psychiatry, 
Part IV. Edited by N. M. van Praag. Marcel Dekker. New York. P. 
547. 
Ferrero, P., A. Guidotti, B. Conti-Tronconi, and E. Costa. 1984. A 
brain octadecaneuropeptide generated 
by tryptic digestion of DBI 
(diazepam binding inhibitor) functions as a proconflict ligand of 
benzodiazepine recognition sites. Neuropharmacology. In press. 
Quirion, R.. R. P. Hammer, Jr.. M. Herkenham. and C. B. 
Pert. 
visualization by tritium-sensitive film. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
1981. Phencyclidine (angel dust], 
the sigma ”opiate” receptor: its 
Quirion, R., T. L. ODonohue, H. Everist. A. Pert,  and C. B. Pert. 
78:588 1. 
1983. Phencyclidine  receptors and possible  existence of an endoge- 
Present  and  Future  Applications. Edited by J. M. Kamenka, E. F. 
nous ligand. In Phencyclidine and Related Arlcyclohexylamines: 
Ho, B. T.. 
D. W. Richards, 111, and D. L. Chute (Eds). 1978. Drug 
Domino, and P. Geneste. NPP Books, Ann Arbor, Michigan. P. 667. 
Discrimination and State-Dependent Learning. 
New York, Aca- 
demic Press. 
Wilson, R. S., M. E. Rogers, C. B. 
Pert, and S. H. Snyder. 1975. 
Homologous N-alkylonorketobemidones. Correlation of receptor 
Pert, C. B., S. H. Snyder, and P. S. Portoghese. 1976. Correlation of 
binding with analgesic potency. J. Med. Chem. 18:240. 
opiate  receptor affinity with  analgesic effects of meperidine homo- 
logues. J. Med. Chem. 19:1248. 
Creese, I., and S. H. Snyder. 1975. Receptor binding and  pharma- 
cological activity of opiates in the guinea pig intestine. J. Pharmacol. 
Bowen, W. D., S. Gentleman, M. Herkenham. and C. B. Pert. 1981. 
Exp. Ther. 194:205. 
Interconverting mu and delta forms of the opiate receptor in rat 
Quirion. R.. W. D. Bowen, M. Herkenham, and C. B. Pert. 1982. 
striatal  patches. Proc. Nati. Acad.  Sci. USA 78:4818. 
Visualization and solubilization of rat  brain opiate  receptors  with a 
Herkenham. M., and C. B. Pert. 1980. In uitro autoradiography of 
kappa ligand selectivity pattern. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 2333. 
opiate  receptors in  rat  brain suggests loci of “opiatergic” pathways. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 77:5532. 
Ostrowski, N. L., J. M. Stapleton, R. G. Nobel, and L. D. Reid. 1979. 
Morphine and naloxone’s effects on sexual behavior of the female 
Pellegrini-Quarantotti, B.. M. G. Corda, E. Paglietti, G. Biggio, and 
golden hamster.  Pharmacol. Biochem. Behau.  11 :673. 
G. L. Gessa. 1978. Inhibition of copulatory behavior in male rats by 
d-A1A2-met-enkephalin amide. Lge Sci. 23573. 
Hill, J. M., M. A. Lesniak, C. B. Pert,  and J. Roth. 1985. Autoradi- 
ographic localization of insulin receptors in  rat brain:  prominence in 
Hendricks. S. A.. J. Roth. S. Rishi, and K. L. Elecker. 1983. Insulin 
olfactory and limbic areas.  Neuroscience. In press. 
B. Martin, and M. J. Brownstein. New York, John Wiley & Sons. P. 
in the nervous system. In Brain  Peptides. Edited by  D. T. Krieger, J. 
903. 
Woods, S. C., E. C. Lotter, L. D. McKay, and D. Porte, Jr. 1979. 
Chronic intracerebroventricular  infusion of insulin reduces food in- 
take  and body weight of baboons. Nature (Land.]  282:503. 
Papez, J. W. 1937. A proposed mechanism of emotions. Arch. 
Neural.  Psychiatry 38:725. 
MacLean. P. D.. and Delgado. J. M. R. 1953. Electrical and chemical 
stimulation of frontotemporal portion of limbic system in the waking 
LaMotte. C. C., A. Snowman, C. B. Pert,  and S .  H. Snyder. 1978. 
animal. EEG Clin. Neurophysiol. 5:91. 
Opitate  receptor  binding in  rhesus monkey brain: association  with 
Hiller. J. M., J. Pearson. and E. J. Simon. 1973. Distribution of 
limbic structures.  Brain  Res.  155374. 
stereospecific  binding of the  potent narcotic  analgesic etorphine  in 
the  human  brain: 
predominance in  the limbic system.  Res. Commun. 
Chem. Pathol.  Pharmacol. 6:1052. 
Rothman, R. B., M. Herkenham. C. B. 
Pert, T. Liang. and M. A. 
Cascieri. 1984. Visualization of rat  brain receptors  for the neuropep- 
tide,  substance P. Brain  Res. 309:47. 
Pert A.,  T. W. Moody.  C.  B. Pert, L. A. Dewald, and J. Rivier. 1980. 
Bombesin: receptor  distribution in  brain  and  effects on nociception 
and locomotor activity. Brain  Res. 193:209. 
Gaudreau, P., R. Quirion, S. St-Pierre, and C. B. Pert. 1983.  Char- 
acterization and visualization of cholecystokinin receptors 
in rat 
Quirion. R., P. Gaudreau. S .  St-Pierre, F. Riow, and C. B. Pert. 
brain using [3H]pentagastrin. Peptides 4:755. 
1982. Autoradlographic  distribution of (3H]neurotensin  receptors in 
28. Pert, A. 1980. Psychopharmacology of analgesia and pain. In Dis- 
in the primate brain: relation  to pain pathways. Brain Res. 80:135. 
Elsiever. New York.  P. 139. 
comfort and  humanitarian  care. Edited by L. Ng, and J. J. Bonica. 
29. Taylor. D. P.. and C. B. Pert. 1979. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide: 
specific binding to  rat  brain  membranes. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 
30. Fabbri, A., F. Fraioli, C. B. Pert. and A. Pert. Calcitonin receptors 
76:660. 
agraphic and behavioral analyses.  Brain  Res. In press. 
in the rat mesencephalon mediate its analgesic actions: autoradi- 
31. Sullivan, T. L., and A. Pert. 1981. Analgesic activity of non-opiate 
neuropeptides following injection into the rat periaqueductal grey 
32. Margioris, A. N., A. S. Liotta, H. Vaudry. C. W. Bardin, and D. T. 
matter. SOC. 
Neuroscl. Abstr  504. 
cortin-related  peptides in rat  testes. Endocrinology i 13:663. 
Krieger. 1983. Characterization of immunoreactive proopiomelano- 
33. Morley. J. E., A. S. Levine, G. K. Yim, and M. T. Lo-. 
1983. Opioid 
modulation of appetite.  Neurosci.  Biobehau. Reu. 7:281. 
34. Recant, L.. N. R. Voyles, M. Luciano, and C. B. Pert. 198 1. Naltrex- 
one reduces weight gain. alters ”@-endorphin.” and reduces  insulin 
output from pancreatic islets of genetically obese mice. Peptides 
1:309. 
35. Darwin. C. 1872. The Expression of 
the Emotions in Man and 
Animals. Edited by J. Murray. Academic Press, London. Reprinted, 
36. McLean, S.. L. R. Skirboll, and C. B. Pert. 1985. Comparison of 
1965. Chicago. University of Chicago Press. 
substance P and  enkephalin  in  rat  brain:  an 
overview using radioim- 
munocytochemistry.  Neuroscience  I4:837. 
37. Mendelsohn. F. A. 0.. R. Quirion, J. M. Saavedra, G. Aguilera, and 
K. J. Catt. 1984. Autoradiographic localization of angiotensin II 
38. Quirion, R., P. Gaudreau. S. St-Pierre, and F. Rioux. 1982. Locali- 
receptors in  rat  brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:1575. 
39. Carraway, R.. D. E. Cochrane, J. B. Lansman, S. E. Leeman, B. M. 
zation of neurotensin binding sites in rat kidney. Peptides 3:765. 
Patterson. and H. J. Welch. 1982. Neurotensin stimulates exocytic 
histamine secretion  from rat  mast cells and aleviates  plasma hista- 
40. Nemeroff, C. B., G. Bissette, P. J. Manberg, A. J. Osbahr, 111, G. R. 
mine levels. J. Physiol. 323:403. 
Breese, and A. J. Prange. Jr. Neurotensin-induced hypothermia: 
pothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Brain Res. 195~69. 
evidence for an interaction with dopaminergic systems  and  the hy- 
41. Weber, R. J., and C. B. Pert. Opiatergic modulation of the immune 
system. In Central and  Peripheral  Endorphins:  Basic  and 
Clinical 
Aspects. Edited by E. E. Muller and A. R. Genazzani. New York. 
42. Usdin. E. (Ed). 1982. PharmacologyofBenzodiazepines. Macmillian 
Raven Press. P. 35. 
43. Ruff, M. R.. C. B. Pert, R. J. Weber, L. M. Wahl, S. M. Wahl, and S. 
Press. Ltd.  P. 56 1. 
M. Paul. Benzodiazepine receptor-mediated chemotaxis of human 
monocytes. Science. In press. 
44. Van Epps, D.. and L. Saland. 1984. P-Endorphin and met-enkepha- 
lin stimulate  human peripheral blood mononuclear cell chemotaxis. 
45. Ruff, M. R., S. M. Wahl, S. Mergenhagen. and C. B. Pert. 1985. 
J. Immunol. 132:3046. 
peptides. 5:363. 
Opiate receptor-mediated chemotaxis of human monocytes. Neuro- 
46. Ruff, M. R.. S. 1. Wahl, and C. B. Pert. Substance P is a chemoat- 
tractant for human monocytes. Peptides. In press. 
47. Ruff, M. R.. E. Schiffman. V. Terranova, and C. B. Pert. Bombesin 
and  small cell lung carcinoma cells. Clin. Immunol. Zmmunopath. 
and  other neuropeptides are  chemoattractants  for  human 
monocytes 
In press. 
48. Bartlett, P. F. 1982. Pluripotent hemopoietic stem cells in adult 
mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 79:2722. 
49. Fontana. A., F. Kristensen. R. Dubs, D. Gemsa. and E. Weber. 
by cultured astrocytes  and Ce glioma cells. J. Immunol. 129:2413. 
1982. Production of prostaglandin E and  an interleukin-1 like factor 
50. Fontana, A.. E. Weber, and J. M. Dayer. 1984.  Synthesis of inter- 
leukine l/endogenous pyrogen in the brain of endotoxin-treated 
mice: a step in fever  induction. J. Immunol. 133: 1696. 
51. Norcross. M. A. 1984. A synaptic basis  for T-lymphocyte activation. 
Ann. Immunol. (Paris)  1350, “2. 
52. LeRoith. D.. J. Shiloach. and J. Roth. 1982. Is there an earlier 
phylogenetic precursor that is common to both the nervous and 
endocrine  systems? Peptides  3~211. 
53. LeRoith. D., A. S. Liotta. J .  Roth. J. Shiloach, M. E. Lewis. C. B. 
Pert, and D. T. Krieger. 1982. Corticotropin and 6-endorphin-like 
materials  are native  to  unicellular  organisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 7912086. 

NEUROPEPTIDES AND THEIR RECEPTORS 
54. LeRoith, D., J. Shiloach, J. Roth,  and M. A. Lesniak. 1980. Evolu- 
tionary  origins of vertebrate  hormones:  substances  similar  to  mam- 
malian  insulin  are  native  to  unicellular  eukaryotes. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 77:6184. 
55. Besedovsky, H.. and E. Sorkin. 1977. Network of immune-neuroen- 
docrine  interactions. Clin. Exp. Imrnunol. 27: 1. 
56. Ruff, M. R., and C. B. Pert. 1984.  Small cell carcinoma of the lung: 
macrophage-specific  antigens  suggest hemopoietic stem cell origin. 
57. Solomon, C. F., and R. H. Moos. 1964. Emotions, immunity and 
Science 225:1034. 
58. Levy, S .  M. 1984.  Emotions  and  the  progression of cancer:  a review. 
disease. Arch. Gen.  Psychiatry 11:657. 
59. Herkenham, M., and C. B. Pert. 1982. Light microscopic localization 
Advances. introductory issue 1:lO. 
of brain  opiate  receptors:  a  general  autoradiographic  method  which 
preserves  tissue  quality. J .  Neurosci. 2: I 129. 
60. Herkenham, M., and C. B. Pert. 1981. Mosaic distribution of opiate 
receptors,  parafascicular  projections  and  acetylcholinesterase  in  the 
61. Wise, S .  P., and M. Herkenham. 1982.  Opiate  receptor  distribution 
rat  striatum. Nature 291:415. 
62. Herkenham, M., 
S. P. Wise, R. Quirion. and 
C. B. Pert. 1982. 
in  the  cerebral  cortex 
of the  rhesus monkey. Science 218:387. 
Neurotensin  receptors  and  opiate  receptors  in  the  forebrain 
of the 
rhesus  monkey:  autoradiographic localization. SOC. Neurosci. Abstr. 
8:647. 
63. Moon-Edley, S., L. Hall. M. Herkenham. and 
C. B. Pert. 1982. 
64. Larsen. A., D. Calne, R. Quirion, M. Herkenham, and C. B. Pert. 
Evolution of striatal  opiate  receptors. Brain Res. 249:184. 
suggest that human nigrostriatal dopamine terminals bear many 
1982. Autoradiographs of parkinson vs. normal human striatum 
65. Kappler, J., J. White, D. Wegmann. E. Mustain, and P. Marrack. 
types of brain  receptors. SOC. Neurosci. Abstr. 8:563. 
1982. Antigen presentation of Ia+ B cell hybridomas to H-2-restricted 
T cell hybridomas. Proc. Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 79:3604. 
66. Schmitt, F. D. 1984. Molecular regulation of brain  function:  a new 
view. Neuroscience 13:991. 
