Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
Available online 7 May 2021
0924-2244/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Neuroprotective properties of coffee: An update 
Sofia M. Carneiro, M. Beatriz P.P. Oliveira, Rita C. Alves * 
REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, Nº 228, 4050-313, Porto, Portugal   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Coffee consumption 
Neurodegenerative diseases 
Health benefits 
Caffeine 
Bioactive compounds 
A B S T R A C T   
Background: Coffee is one of the most consumed beverages worldwide due to its appreciated organoleptic 
characteristics and stimulant effects. It is known that coffee consumption can promote several health benefits. 
Neurodegenerative diseases are a well-known type of health conditions and a serious health problem, strongly 
related to the aging of world population. The effects of coffee and its compounds on these disorders have been 
extensively studied during last years, although there is still much to understand. 
Scope and approach: Despite the great amount of research on this subject, review papers regarding the coffee 
beverage as a whole are limited. The aim of the present review is to assess the real impact of coffee intake on the 
onset, development and course of neurodegenerative disorders, through a literature review and a summary of the 
most relevant papers of the last 10 years. 
Key findings and conclusions: Correlations have been found between coffee consumption and neuroprotective 
outcomes. Cognitive impairment, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases are the most explored areas. Overall, the 
risk of developing such diseases seems to decrease with moderate to high coffee intake. The interactions between 
compounds, their relative amounts, and the changes during processing, demonstrated to influence the expected 
outcomes of neuroprotection. Recently, the step of storage has been investigated regarding modifications in 
composition, highlighting the importance of quality control within coffee industry and the need for further work. 
More investigation is still necessary, although coffee may be regarded at least as a complement in the treatment 
of neurodegenerative diseases.   
1. Introduction 
Coffee is one of the most known and consumed beverages in the 
world (FAO, 2003; ICO, 2020a). More precisely, the world population 
consumes around 2 billion cups of coffee per day (Farah, 2019). It is 
therefore an important resource traded in the worldwide markets, with 
numbers around 10 million bags globally exported per month, which 
represents more than 600,000 tons of coffee and 14 billion US dollars 
(ICO, 2020b; ICO, 2020c). 
This high interest for coffee is not only due to its organoleptic 
characteristics (for instance, its desirable bitterness and the great 
amount of flavours and aromas), but also to its ability to stimulate the 
central nervous system (CNS) (Alves et al., 2009a). Caffeine is the most 
well-known coffee component and the main responsible for its psycho­
active effects. In the 20th century, research also started to focus on other 
coffee substances and their beneficial health consequences (Alves et al., 
2009a; Bizzo et al., 2015). Nowadays, we know there are more than 
1000 compounds within a coffee beverage, several of which have a 
bioactive role. Indeed, recent studies show that consuming 3 to 4 cups of 
coffee per day, that is, a moderate consumption according to the Euro­
pean Food Safety Authority (EFSA), can be advantageous for health 
(Contaldo et al., 2019; EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products Nutrition Al­
lergies, 2015; G¨okcen & S¸anlier, 2019). 
The present work focuses on the topic of coffee beneficial effects 
regarding human health. More precisely, it emphasises one of the most 
important medical issues nowadays, despite still largely in need of 
further findings: the neurodegenerative diseases. In fact, despite there is 
plenty of research on this subject, review papers regarding the coffee 
beverage as a whole and its influence on neurogenerative diseases spe­
cifically, are limited. Very recently, a review paper on the role of 
decaffeinated coffee in these diseases was published (Colombo & 
Papetti, 2020). However, it did not give attention to the original un­
treated beverage, whose compounds and respective amounts are natu­
rally different. Other recent review focuses on the possible mechanisms 
of action of several coffee bioactive compounds in relation to their 
neuroprotective potential. Moreover, it presents findings from both in 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: rcalves@ff.up.pt (R.C. Alves).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Trends in Food Science & Technology 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tifs 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.04.052 
Received 3 November 2020; Received in revised form 22 April 2021; Accepted 26 April 2021   

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
168
vitro and in vivo experiments concerning each compound, separately 
(Socała et al., 2021). The present work comprises a review on the neu­
roprotective role of coffee beverages, presenting some background in­
formation as well as recent updates on this topic, focusing on both 
animal and human in vivo studies from the past 10 years. At the end, in 
combination with some conclusions, the need for further work and 
future trends is also brought into view. Hence, the aim of the work 
herein presented is to ascertain, according to key results and main 
conclusions, the real impact of the coffee brew consumption on the 
onset, development, and course of several neurodegenerative disorders. 
2. Methodology 
A literature research was performed using the electronic databases 
Science Direct, Scopus, Pubmed and Google Scholar. Several websites of 
interest were also accessed for specific topics. For each part of the work, 
the method of search varied slightly, regarding its main purpose. 
For the part that comprises an overview on coffee chemical constit­
uents and their general health benefits, the conducted search included 
the following words: “coffee”, “chemistry”, “caffeine”, “bioactive com­
pounds”, “chlorogenic acids”, “roasting”, “volatile compounds” and 
“health benefits”. Around 50 more references containing important in­
formation were selected. 
Regarding the chapter that focus on the neuroprotective potential of 
coffee, more literature was searched. For some background information 
on neurodegenerative diseases, official medical websites, documents 
and books, as well as some papers on this area, were selected. Looking 
for terms such as “nervous system”, “neurons”, “neurodegenerative 
disorders”, “dementia”, “cognitive impairment”, “Alzheimer”, “Parkin­
son” and others identifying specific neurodegenerative conditions, 23 
references were used. For the sub-chapter about the neuroprotective 
effects of coffee, 29 more references were selected using the keywords 
“coffee compounds”, “bioactive compounds”, “neuroprotection”, 
“neurotoxicity”, “neuroinflammation”, “antioxidant”, “adenosine” and 
“cytokines”. Finally, with regards to the last part of this review, which 
comprised a summary of relevant studies on the neuroprotective po­
tential of coffee from the last 10 years, by making use of the mentioned 
literature research databases, restricting the search by years - 2010 to 
2020 - and using the keywords “coffee”, “consumption”, “neurodegen­
erative” and “neuroprotection”, the search was conducted. 222 articles 
were presented and, lastly, these were manually selected regarding 
several excluding and including criteria. Articles were considered 
eligible for this work if they (i) described studies or meta-analyses with 
(ii) an observational or interventional design of (iii) human or animal in 
vivo studies, in which (iv) some type of association between coffee 
consumption and a neuroprotective outcome was investigated. 
Excluding criteria comprised articles which studied isolated coffee 
compounds instead of total coffee intake, as the interest of this work is 
precisely to assess the potential of the coffee beverage as a whole. 
However, investigations focusing on compounds which had been 
extracted directly from the beverage or whose exposure might be esti­
mated in consequence of the coffee beverage intake were also 
considered. 
Therefore, obtained literature included animal, human epidemio­
logical and human observational studies, the latter comprising cohort, 
case-control or cross-sectional investigations. In terms of studied pop­
ulation, any type of subject was considered, regardless of age, sex, 
ethnicity or country. Participants might be either healthy or unhealthy 
regarding some type of pre-diagnosed neurodegenerative disorder, and 
their level of consumption of coffee might be of any type, from habitual 
to inexistent. Coffee intake was usually estimated through the number of 
cups a day, and studies including decaffeinated coffee were also taken 
into account. 
As a result of this search and criteria, 23 relevant articles were 
considered for analysis and elaboration of Table 1, employed to sum­
marise all the relevant findings and consequently reach the conclusions 
of the present review. 
3. The plant 
The coffee beverage is obtained, in a general way, from dried and 
roasted beans which are then crushed and minced, and the resulting 
powder brewed in order to get a liquid product. These beans are, in 
reality, the seeds of fruits of small trees and bushes that grow in tropical 
areas (Farah & Santos, 2015). In botanical terms, these plants are part of 
the Rubiaceae family, within which there are around 500 genera and 
more than 6000 species. One of these genera is the Coffea genus, which is 
the most important of the Rubiaceae with regards to the world economy, 
and also the one that comprises the coffee plant (Ferreira et al., 2019). 
Moreover, under the Coffea genus, there are several species, three of 
which show commercial interest. These are Coffea arabica, Coffea can­
ephora (generally known as robusta coffee) and also Coffea liberica. The 
differences between these three species rely not only on the physical 
features of the plant, chemical composition and growth conditions 
(terroir), but also on the quality of the beverage. C. arabica is known for 
the highest quality and appreciated sensory characteristics, for instance 
its low bitterness and its intense aroma, representing around 70% of the 
world production, while C. canephora presents the greatest resistance to 
diseases and harsh conditions and corresponds to 10–25% of the pro­
duction. C. liberica is by far the least cultivated of the three (Alves et al., 
2017; Ferreira et al., 2019; Preti, 2019, pp. 85–121). 
4. Main bioactive compounds of coffee 
Roasted coffee beans comprise more than 1000 bioactive compounds 
with a variety of physiological effects as well as health benefits (Alves 
et al., 2009a; Miranda et al., 2017; Morisco et al., 2014). With regards to 
bioactive substances, the majority belongs to polyphenol and alkaloid 
classes. Caffeine is a well-known alkaloid of the methylxanthines family 
and is the most abundant phsycoactive constituent of the coffee brew 
[Fig. 1 (A)]. Its effects are largely associated with the antagonism of 
adenosine receptors. As adenosine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, 
caffeine stimulates the CNS, increasing mood, alertness and improving 
reaction time (Clark & Landolt, 2017; EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products 
Nutrition Allergies, 2015). Moreover, caffeine is also an inhibitor of 
phosphodiesterases, with a consequent influence on AMPc metabolism 
(EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products Nutrition Allergies, 2015). Other 
methylxanthines include theobromine and theophylline [Fig. 1 (B)], 
which are found in considerably lower amounts than caffeine (Rodri­
gues & Bragagnolo, 2013). 
Trigonelline [Fig. 1 (C)], the second main alkaloid of coffee beans, 
shows high bioavailability and is related to hypoglycaemic and neuro­
protective benefits (Pereira et al., 2020; Rodrigues & Bragagnolo, 2013). 
Moreover, a natural antimicrobial activity against some groups of bac­
teria was also demonstrated (Almeida et al., 2006). Trigonelline suffers 
profound changes during roasting originating vitamin B3 [also known as 
nicotinic acid or niacin, Fig. 1 (D)] (Franca et al., 2005; Franca & Oli­
veira, 2016) and that is why roasted coffee contains higher amounts of 
nicotinic acid (Jeszka-Skowron et al., 2020).” 
With respect to furans, which constitute the most abundant volatile 
products and are the result of sugars degradation during roast, the 5- 
hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF) is an important example [Fig. 1 (E)]. 
This has been usually associated with negative outcomes, such as irritant 
or genotoxic effects, but in vitro studies have shown that it may also 
present antioxidant and antiproliferative properties (Zhao et al., 2013). 
Hydroxycinnamic acids, such as caffeic and ferulic acid [Fig. 1 (F)], 
comprise another relevant group of compounds present in coffee, which 
have antioxidant properties (Vignoli et al., 2011). In particular, caffeic 
acid shows antibacterial activity and anti-inflammatory responses 
(Almeida et al., 2006; Bufalo et al., 2013). Coffee is also one of the main 
sources of chlorogenic acids (CGA) in human diet (Rodrigues & Bra­
gagnolo, 2013), an extensive family of esters of hydroxycinnamic acids 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
169
Table 1 
Relevant research on the effects of coffee consumption on neurodegenerative conditions.  
Reference 
Author 
Country 
Year 
Study design 
Type of study 
Subjects 
Intake (if applicable) 
Method 
Studied hypothesis/outcome 
Substance 
Effect 
Findings 
Neurodegenerative 
disease/condition 
In vivo animal studies 
Cao et al. (2011) 
USA 
2011 
Acute treatment study 
AD Transgenic and NT mice 
Eq. to 5 cups of coffee (500 mg caffeine) 
Intraperitoneal administration of caffeine, 
BC and brewed decaffeinated coffee; 
Determination of plasma cytokines, 
caffeine and Aβ conc 
Long-term treatment study 
AD Transgenic and NT mice 
Eq. to 2 and ½ cups of coffee twice weekly 
(250 mg caffeine) 
Intraperitoneal administration of caffeine, 
BC and brewed decaffeinated coffee for 3 
months; Determination of plasma 
cytokines, caffeine and Aβ conc.; Memory 
task 
Coffee/decaffeinated coffee/caffeine 
Interaction between caffeine and non- 
caffeine components of coffee to 
provide neuroprotection by 
enhancement of key cytokines plasma 
levels 
Coffee, but not decaffeinated or caffeine 
alone, induced large elevations in plasma 
key cytokines for neuronal survival; 
Caffeine synergized with other coffee 
compounds to increase neuroprotection 
against AD 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Sedaghat et al. 
(2019) 
Iran 
2019 
Experimental animal model 
32 male rats within 4 groups: control, BC 
prior to test, AD induced prior to test; BC 
prior to induced AD 
Eq. to 8 cups of 50 mL of BC per day 
Spatial and memory tasks; Brain tissue 
sampling; Biochemical analysis by ELISA 
Coffee 
Preventive result of coffee pre- 
treatment on memory, antioxidant 
balance and pro-inflammatory 
cytokine level of induced-AD rats 
Induced AD resulted in impairment of 
active and passive memory and in an 
increase of inflammatory cytokines in 
hippocampus; 
Pre-treatment with BC improved 
memory, reduced cytokines level and 
restored antioxidant capacity 
Alzheimer’s disease 
In vivo human studies 
Ritchie et al. 
(2010) 
France 
2010 
Epidemiological study 
641 persons from Montpellier with ≥65 
years old 
Questionnaire for daily caffeine intake 
(calculations were made on the assumption 
that one cup of coffee contained 100 mg of 
caffeine and tea 50 mg); MRI for estimation 
of WML 
Caffeine 
Caffeine via adenosine is linked to 
amyloid accumulation and subsequent 
WML 
Higher doses of caffeine intake 
associated with lower WML volume 
cognitive change over time in women 
Cognitive decline 
Santos et al. 
(2010b) 
Portugal 
2010 
Cohort study with a 3-year follow-up 
531 adults living in Porto with ≥65 years 
old 
Questionnaire for daily food intake (Food 
Processor Plus ® used to estimate caffeine 
intake). Assessment of cognitive function. 
Caffeine 
Association between caffeine intake 
and cognitive decline, with possible 
gender influence 
Caffeine intake associated with lower 
cognitive decline risk in women and 
possibly in men 
Cognitive decline 
Simonin et al. 
(2013) 
France 
2013 
Cohort study with a 2-year follow-up 
80 HD patients 
Definition of age at onset of HD; Self-survey 
for daily caffeine intake, including coffee, 
concerning the previous 10 years; 2 
assessments of the level of HD related 
capacities; Evaluation of annual 
progression 
Caffeine 
Association between caffeine intake 
and age at onset or functional/motor 
decline in patients with HD 
Caffeine consumption higher than 190 
mg/day showed an association with 
earlier age at onset in HD of about 4 
years; 
There was no correlation between 
caffeine intake and motor capacities 
Huntington’s disease 
Ding et al. (2015) 
USA 
2015 
Cohort study from 3 prospective cohorts 
From 4,690,072-person follow-up, 19,524 
women and 12,432 men who died 
Questionnaire for daily coffee intake; 
Search for assessment of deaths 
Coffee 
Association between consumption of 
caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee 
and risk of mortality 
Significant inverse association observed 
between coffee consumption and deaths 
due to CVD, suicide and neurological 
diseases 
Neurodegenerative 
diseases 
Fondell et al. 
(2015) 
USA 
2015 
Longitudinal study of 5 large cohort studies 
with a mean follow-up of 18 years 
Population of 1,010,000 subjects with 1279 
documented cases of ALS 
Food frequency questionnaire, including 
total caffeine intake 
Caffeine 
Association between caffeine, coffee, 
tea and caffeinated soda intakes and 
ALS risk 
There was no association between 
caffeine or coffee intake and risk of ALS 
Amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis 
Moccia et al. 
(2016) 
Italy 
2016 
Longitudinal observational cohort study 
with 4 years follow-up 
De novo PD subjects from an Italian 
hospital 
Questionnaire for daily caffeine intake, 
including coffee; Evaluation of motor and 
non-symptoms progression 
Caffeine 
Association of caffeine intake with 
motor and non-motor symptoms of PD 
High caffeine intakes were related to a 
reduced occurrence of both motor and 
non-motor PD symptoms during the 4- 
year follow-up 
Parkinson’s disease 
Wu et al. (2017) 
China 
2017 
Dose-response meta-analysis of 9 
prospective cohort studies (1.3–8 years 
follow-up) 
Total of 34,282 participants 
Coffee 
Influence of coffee consumption and 
its dose-response patterns on the risk 
of cognitive disorders development 
Dose-response relationship 
demonstrated between the risk of 
developing cognitive disorders and 
coffee intake; 
Cognitive disorders 
(continued on next page) 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
170
Table 1 (continued) 
Reference 
Author 
Country 
Year 
Study design 
Type of study 
Subjects 
Intake (if applicable) 
Method 
Studied hypothesis/outcome 
Substance 
Effect 
Findings 
Neurodegenerative 
disease/condition 
Data classification, including categorisation 
of the daily coffee intake 
Lower risk was found to be with 1–2 cups 
per day 
Haller et al. (2018) 
Switzerland 
2018 
Cohort study during 3-year follow-up 
145 community-based elderly individuals 
with 69–85 years old cognitively preserved 
at the beginning 
Initial neuropsychological assessment; MRI 
data acquisition; Questionnaire for 
consumption habits including coffee; 2 
follow-up neuropsychological assessments 
Coffee/wine/chocolate 
Correlation between structural and 
cerebral blood flow with coffee, wine 
and chocolate consumption habits 
Chronic coffee intake associated with 
beneficial cognitive performance and 
moderate-heavy intake correlated with 
better cerebral blood-flow in cognitively 
stable elders 
Cognitive decline 
Kim et al. (2019) 
South Korea 
2019 
Prospective cohort study 
411 non-demented or with MCI participants 
between 55 and 90 years old from a Korean 
study 
Clinical neuropsychologic evaluation and 
daily coffee intake assessment; Several 
neuroimaging procedures 
Coffee 
Coffee intake and its relationship with 
in vivo AD pathologies, including Aβ 
aggregation 
Consumption of more than 2 cups per 
day was associated with lower levels of 
Aβ accumulation; 
Lifetime consumption showed a more 
significant relationship than more recent 
use, meaning chronic effects associated 
with prolonged exposure are more 
effective 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Beghi et al. (2011) 
Italy 
2011 
Case-control study 
377 patients with newly diagnosed ALS 
from Italy with ≥18 years old 
820 controls from hospital with and 
without neurological conditions 
Questionnaire for daily coffee intake 
Coffee 
Relation between coffee intake and 
risk of ALS 
Current coffee drinkers seemed to have a 
lower risk of ALS 
Amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis 
Gelber et al. (2011) 
USA 
2011 
Case-control study 
3494 men of mean age 52 at the beginning 
of the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study 
(1965–1968); 418 of whom decedents 
(1992–2004) 
Self-reported caffeine intake including 
coffee consumption; Dementia and 
cognitive assessment (1991–1993); Brain 
autopsy to the decedents for 
neuropathologic lesions 
Coffee/caffeine 
Association between midlife 
consumption and late life risk of 
dementia, neuropathology and 
cognitive impairment 
Coffee and caffeine midlife intake did not 
show association with dementia or 
cognitive impairment after 25 years; 
Among decedents, an association was 
observed between the highest 
consumptions and lower risk of having 
neuropathologic lesions, although there 
was no correlation with specific lesion 
types 
Dementia/ 
neuropathology/ 
cognitive decline 
Cao et al. (2012) 
USA 
2012 
Case-control study over 2–4 years 
124 randomly-selected subjects between 65 
and 88 years at the beginning of the study 
Neurological initial assessment; 
Determination of plasma caffeine, Aβ and 
cytokines conc.; Yearly cognitive 
assessments 
Coffee/caffeine 
Direct human evidence of coffee/ 
caffeine effects on AD protection by 
measurement of blood caffeine levels 
High levels of plasma caffeine in initial 
MCI patients were associated with 
complete inhibition of progression into 
dementia over the 2–4 years period; 
Plasma key cytokines decreased in 
patients who progressed to dementia and 
not in MCI stable patients 
Dementia/Alzheimer’s 
disease 
Boot et al. (2013) 
USA 
2013 
Case-control study 
Patients with incident dementia +
community-dwelling persons with 70–89 
years; Age- and sex-matched controls 
Clinical diagnosis of patients; Risk factors 
(including caffeine consumption) 
assessment 
Coffee/caffeine 
19 possible risk factors associated 
with the likelihood of DLB, AD, and 
normal aging 
Risk factors were similar to those already 
identified for AD and PD; 
Prior caffeine consumption was seen to 
be related to reduced eventual DLB 
diagnosis, in a stronger way than to AD 
or PD 
Dementia with Lewy 
bodies 
Qi and Li (2014) 
China 
2014 
Dose-response meta-analysis of case- 
control studies 
13 articles involving 901 764 participants 
for coffee, 8 articles involving 344 895 
participants for tea, 7 articles involving 492 
724 participants for caffeine; Studies from 
Asia, Europe and EUA 
Coffee/tea/caffeine 
Influence of these on PD risk 
Maximum protection of coffee on PD was 
found to be with 3 cups per day; 
Linear relationship between caffeine 
consumption and decreased risk of PD 
Parkinson’s disease 
Yamada-Fowler 
et al. (2014) 
Sweden 
2014 
Case-control study 
193 PD patients aged 49–85 who were 
visiting a Swedish hospital; relatively 
homogenous population 
Control group with 377 individuals 
Questionnaire for daily coffee intake; Blood 
samples collection followed by DNA 
analyses 
Coffee/caffeine 
Genetic variability, namely glutamate 
receptors genotypes, influences 
protective effects of coffee intake on 
PD, due to regulation of excitatory 
neurotransmitters 
Irrespective of genotype, heavy coffee 
intake (>237.8 mg/day) was associated 
with significant PD risk reduction. 
Studied genotype is PD protective and, in 
combination with caffeine, presents 
enhanced effects 
Parkinson’s disease 
Hedstr¨om et al. 
(2016) 
Sweden, USA 
2016 
Analysis of 2 case-control studies 
1620 MS and potentially MS subjects from 
Sweden; 1159 subjects with MS from 
Northern California; 
Matched controls without MS for each case 
(In both studies) Questionnaire for daily 
coffee intake during life and age of MS 
onset 
Coffee 
Association of consumption with 
lower risk of MS 
Higher coffee consumption was 
associated with lower risk of developing 
MS 
Multiple sclerosis 
Multiple sclerosis 
(continued on next page) 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
171
and quinic acid, being 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid [5-CQA, Fig. 1 (G)] the 
most abundant in coffee (Alves et al., 2010a; Rodrigues & Bragagnolo, 
2013). CGA have been reported to show a wide variety of health bene­
fits, including, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antioxidant and antitu­
moral activities (Agudelo-Ochoa et al., 2016; Loader et al., 2017; Santos 
et al., 2006; Tajik et al., 2017). Furthermore, brain and neuroprotective 
effects were also described (Tajik et al., 2017). Along the beans roast, 
chlorogenic acids decrease considerably, originating phenolic com­
pounds such as chlorogenic acid lactones, which are formed after the 
loss of a water molecule of the quinic acid structure with the formation 
of an ester bond. These lactones, which have shown effects on the brain 
(Pereira et al., 2019) breakdown into phenylindanes, which, apart from 
being significantly responsible for the bitterness of coffee, have also 
been studied in terms of neuroprotective potential (Mancini et al., 2018; 
Poisson et al., 2017). 
Melanoidins are an important Maillard reaction product with high 
molecular weight, resulting from the interaction between sugars, amino 
acids, and phenolic compounds. Melanoidins chemical structure is still 
not entirely acknowledged, but they are known to be responsible for the 
brown colour of the roasted coffee beans, and their anticarcinogenic, 
antioxidant, antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties have been 
reported (P´erez-Burillo et al., 2020; Poisson et al., 2017; Vignoli et al., 
2011). For this reason, medium roasted coffee presents the highest 
antioxidant potential, as degradation of phenolic compounds is balanced 
by the development of these antioxidant products of Maillard reactions 
(Esquivel & Jim´enez, 2012; Pereira et al., 2020; Vignoli et al., 2011). 
Coffee is also a main dietary source of norharman and harman [Fig. 1 
(H)] and the amount of these β-carbolines in the beverage depends 
mainly on the coffee species, degree of roasting and brewing method 
(Alves et al., 2007). There compounds occur during coffee roast by 
Pictet-Spengler condensation of tryptophan or amine derivatives with 
aldehydes or α-keto acids. Beneficial neuro effects have been suggested 
for these two compounds, specially related to their ability to inhibit 
monoaminooxidases in a reversible way (Casal, 2015). 
The neurotransmitter serotonin [Fig. 1 (I)] has also been found in 
coffee, especially in roasted beans, which suggests its formation during 
the roasting process (Martins & Gloria, 2010). 
In what concerns to the lipid fraction of coffee, cafestol and kahweol 
are relevant compounds known for their antioxidant, antitumoral (due 
to mediation of cell apoptosis), and antigenotoxic activities (Cavin et al., 
2002; Wachamo, 2017). On the other hand, they have been associated to 
an increase in LDL-cholesterol (Cavin et al., 2002). Coffee bean (espe­
cially from the arabica species) is also rich in tocopherols which present 
high scavenging capacity against free radicals (Alves et al., 2009b). 
However, the amount of these lipophilic molecules in the beverage de­
pends significantly on the brewing method (Alves et al., 2009c). 
Coffee also contains a high amount of polysaccharides, including 
galactomannans and arabinogalactans, which have a positive influence 
on gut microbiota that, in turn, has been increasingly associated to a 
good brain function (through the gut microbiota-brain axis) (Franca & 
Oliveira, 2016; Jaquet et al., 2009; Wang & Wang, 2016). 
Table 1 (continued) 
Reference 
Author 
Country 
Year 
Study design 
Type of study 
Subjects 
Intake (if applicable) 
Method 
Studied hypothesis/outcome 
Substance 
Effect 
Findings 
Neurodegenerative 
disease/condition 
D’Hooghe et al. 
(2012) 
Belgium 
2012 
Cross-sectional survey 
1372 Individuals with MS registered in the 
Flemish MS society 
Questionnaire for consumption habits, 
including coffee intake, and MS 
characteristics, including onset and course 
of disease 
Coffee/alcoholic beverages/fish/ 
cigarettes smoking 
Relation of these with disability 
progression in MS 
Higher consumption of coffee was 
associated with a decreased probability 
of reaching moderate disability in 
relapsing onset MS, whereas smoking 
was associated with an increased risk. 
First time coffee consumption was 
associated with a reduced progression of 
disability in relapsing onset MS 
Travassos et al. 
(2015) 
Portugal, Greece, 
Turkey, 
Denmark 
2015 
Cross-sectional study 
88 patients with AD or MCI 
Questionnaire for consumption habits 
regarding caffeine and theobromine intake; 
Collection of CSF samples; Quantification of 
compound levels in CSF by LC-MS; 
Quantification of Aβ levels in CSF by ELISA 
Caffeine/theobromine 
Caffeine/theobromine may influence 
Aβ metabolic pathways and, therefore, 
the decrease of its levels in CSF, 
improving neuroprotection 
No correlation between caffeine intake 
and Aβ CSF levels. 
Theobromine showed positive 
correlation with Aβ levels in CSF, 
suggesting a neuroprotective role 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Cho et al. (2018) 
South Korea 
2018 
Cross-sectional study 
196 early-stage, treatment-naïve PD 
patients of a South Korea hospital 
Clinical evaluation of non-motor 
symptoms; Interview for coffee intake 
habits 
Coffee 
Association between coffee and non- 
motor symptoms in PD patients 
Differences in the prevalence of the 
symptoms were not significant, while 
differences in the severity of non-motor 
symptoms were significant between 
coffee drinkers and non-drinkers, with 
the first showing lower severity 
Parkinson’s disease 
Gigante et al. 
(2018) 
Italy 
2018 
Cross-sectional investigation over 5 years 
83 PD patients 
Socio-demographic and clinical 
information collected, as well as coffee and 
smoking habits 
Coffee 
Coffee habitual consumption may 
present changes in striatal DAT-SPECT 
imaging 
Chronic coffee drinking showed no 
relation to changes in striatal DAT 
availability. 
An association between coffee 
consumption and increasing age at PD 
onset was found 
Parkinson’s disease 
Dong et al. (2020) 
USA 
2020 
Cross-sectional survey 
2513 American subjects with ≥60 years old 
Interview for caffeine intake from 24-h 
dietary recall (2 cycles); Cognitive 
performance evaluation 
Coffee/decaffeinated coffee/caffeine 
from coffee 
Association of these with cognitive 
performance in older adults 
Association between coffee/caffeine 
from coffee and cognitive performance. 
No correlation between decaffeinated 
coffee and cognitive behaviour. 
Results indicated that women are more 
susceptible to caffeine effects than men 
Cognitive decline 
Aβ: Amyloid-β; AD: Alzheimer’s disease; ALS: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; BC: Brewed coffee; CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; CVD: Cardiovascular disease; DAT-SPECT: 
Dopamine Active Transporter-Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography; DLB: Dementia with Lewy bodies; HD: Huntington’s disease; LC-MS: Liquid Chro­
matography with Mass Spectrometry; MCI: Mild cognitive impairment; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; MS: Multiple sclerosis; NT: Non-transgenic; PD: Parkinson’s 
disease; WML: White matter lesions. 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
172
5. Coffee and its neuroprotective potential 
5.1. Neurodegenerative diseases 
Neurological conditions, specifically neurodegenerative diseases, 
which result from decay or even death of neurons, are extremely inca­
pacitating and may affect people of all ages. Moreover, since the risk of 
developing this type of conditions increases with age due to the natural 
degeneration of neurons, the fact that the world population is ageing is a 
contributing factor for the aggravation of this problem worldwide. For 
this reason, neurodegenerative diseases not only constitute a real 
contemporary medical topic, but also an enormous social problem and, 
hence, are being extensively studied (Fundaç˜ao Calouste Gulbenkian, 
2015). Many years of investigation allowed to recognise a few hundred 
different disorders comprising the neurodegenerative field (Przedborski 
et al., 2003). Some examples are: Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s 
disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis (MS) 
and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Some more rare include familial 
amyloid polyneuropathy or paramyloidose, Huntington disease (HD) 
and Machado-Joseph disease (MJD). It is important to clearly under­
stand the causes and conduct research for novel forms of treatment and 
prevention of such diseases (Huang et al., 2019). In fact, the causes of 
these conditions are, till the date, not completely understood. It is 
believed to be associated with genetics, but it can also be its combination 
with environmental aspects. 
Alzheimer’s is, by far, the most common neurodegenerative disease 
nowadays, and it represents nearly 60–70% of all dementia cases (JPND 
Research, 2019). It is characterised by a progressive and irreversible 
decay of cognitive functions such as memory, thinking capacity and 
language, as a result of a reduction (in number and size) of brain neurons 
and consequently, formation of amyloid fibrils on the inside (amyloid-β 
[Aβ] protein), as well as senile plaques on the extracellular space. This 
causes communication within the brain to stop and, lastly, death of the 
nervous cells throughout the whole brain, which justifies the loss of 
abilities (Associaç˜ao Alzheimer Portugal, 2020). There are two types of 
AD: one has a genetic basis and, therefore, is inherited, representing only 
0.1% of the total cases; the other one is named sporadic, whose causes 
remain undefined (Associaç˜ao Alzheimer Portugal, 2020; World Health 
Organization, 2013). 
Parkinson’s is another well-known neurodegenerative disease and it 
is the second most common one. It is based on the degradation of neu­
rons placed in the deep region of the brain called substantia nigra pars 
compacta, producers of the neurotransmitter dopamine, as well as on 
the presence of globs of specific neuron proteins in the surviving cells, 
called Lewy bodies. As a result, PD is characterised by a decrease in 
dopamine and causes motor disabilities, such as tremors, rigidity and 
weakened balance. Similarly, the causes of this disease are yet not clear 
(Lai & Tsui, 2001). 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis affects motor neurons, which are 
responsible for transmitting information between the brain and muscles 
from the whole body. These neurons dye sooner than expected and the 
associated muscles become weaker. Muscular atrophy is also a symptom 
and, in more advanced stages, failure of respiratory muscles can happen. 
The first symptoms usually appear around the age of 60 and patients die, 
in the majority of cases, after 5 years. It is a rare disease with only 5–10% 
of the cases related to genetic inheritance (Associaç˜ao Portuguesa de 
Esclerose Lateral Amiotr´ofica, 2018; MSD, 2019). 
Multiple sclerosis is slightly different from the previous diseases, 
since it appears at young adult age, from 20 to 40 years old. It is also 
different, as it comprises an autoimmune response in which the body 
attacks itself, which results in inflammation and destruction of myelin, 
an important substance that protects nerve cells and aids the process of 
signals transmission. This destruction produces scars along the nerves 
which can either be reversible, when the formation of new myelin is 
possible and neurological function recovered, or irreversible when this 
situation is more serious and the neurons are destroyed before new 
myelin can be produced (National Multiple Sclerosis Society, 2020). MS 
presents around 3 times more prevalence in women than men (Wallin 
et al., 2019). 
Dementia with Lewy bodies is another neurodegenerative disease 
and represents a considerable percentage of dementia cases within 
elderly population. Some symptoms are similar to those observed in AD 
and PD, including cognitive and motor impairment, although these are 
reported as being more severe and usually associated with hallucina­
tions and behavioural instabilities (Vann Jones & O’Brien, 2014). 
In terms of more rare neurologic conditions, Huntington disease is a 
genetic disorder that results in a mutant huntingtin protein, which in 
turn causes the death of neurons within some regions of the brain. It has 
a middle age onset and the outcomes include severe abnormal move­
ments and progressive cognitive deterioration, which ends in severe 
dementia (MSD, 2020). Due to the fact that HD is a condition influenced 
mainly by genetic factors, it is comprehensible that its prevention may 
be difficult. 
Machado-Joseph disease starts between 30 and 50 years old, in the 
majority of cases. It is caused by a genetic mutation which results in 
serious progressive ataxia, that is, the loss of coordination and muscles 
control (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2010). 
Many other neurodegenerative diseases may occur, although the 
Fig. 1. Coffee main bioactive compounds and their chemical structures. (A) 
Caffeine. (B) Theobromine (left) and theophylline (right). (C) Trigonelline. (D) 
Nicotinic acid. (E) 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural. (F) Caffeic (left) and ferulic (right) 
acid. (G) 5-Caffeoylquinic acid. (H) Norharman (left) and harman (right). (I) 
Serotonin. (J) α-Tocopherol. 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
173
main problems that arise from the whole set have a similar outcome, as 
regarded before. Notwithstanding pathogenesis and the different 
mechanisms of each one, cognitive impairment, or dementia, is the main 
concern induced by all these neurological conditions. It is, therefore, 
vital to find ways of improving patients’ life, namely their independence 
reducing the need for support of caregivers, as well as their emotional 
well-being which is frequently debilitated by their health situation, 
emerging for example, anxiety and depression problems (Prince et al., 
2015). 
Along the last years, researchers have been showing that moderate 
coffee consumption may have beneficial effects on this type of condi­
tions, helping mostly in decreasing or delaying the risk of its develop­
ment, as well as in attenuating the associated symptoms of patients 
(Costa et al., 2010; Institute for Scientific Information on Coffee, 2019; 
Santos et al., 2010a). These effects can be linked to several of the coffee 
components above mentioned. Hereafter, these compounds will be 
presented in a more detailed way, namely focusing on their possible 
mechanisms of neuroprotective potential. 
5.2. Relation between coffee compounds and neuroprotective effects 
Unsurprisingly, caffeine is the most extensively described substance 
in regard to neuroprotective potential of coffee. A recent review by 
Kolahdouzan and Hamadeh (2017) focused on the effects of this 
particular compound on neurodegenerative diseases. Caffeine neuro­
protective activity is essentially based on its antagonism of adenosine 
receptors within the brain, because of their similar chemical structures 
since both are purines. Adenosine chemical structure is represented in 
Fig. 2. Caffeine has been shown to reduce excitotoxicity, cell apoptosis 
and inflammation, as well as to partially cure memory problems 
(Madeira et al., 2017). Moreover, oxidative stress is believed to play an 
essential role on neurodegeneration. Since the brain uses a great amount 
of oxygen leading to oxidative damage, and has unsaturated fatty acids 
which promote lipid peroxidation, it comprises an obvious target for this 
negative biologic event (Hemmati-Dinarvand et al., 2019). As a matter 
of fact, caffeine has also been described as an antioxidant, being able to 
protect against oxidative damages typical of most neurodegenerative 
conditions (Kolahdouzan & Hamadeh, 2017). 
More specifically, regarding AD, caffeine has shown to protect 
against the disruption of the blood-brain barrier, a process which is seen 
in the early stages of the disease and promotes the accumulation of Aβ 
(Madeira et al., 2017). This compound can also diminish Aβ concen­
trations through the inhibition of its secretion pathway. More specif­
ically, 
its 
demonstrated 
anti-inflammatory, 
antioxidant 
and 
mitochondrial activities, as well as neurological stimulation, showing 
effectiveness in neuroprotection against AD, for instance by improving 
cognitive impairment and memory retention (Kolahdouzan & Hamadeh, 
2017; Sanlier et al., 2019). 
Regarding the association between caffeine effects and neurode­
generative diseases, Parkinson’s has been shown to be the disorder 
presenting the strongest relation with this compound. Caffeine allows to 
reduce neuroinflammation, which has been shown using mice models. 
Moreover, since it acts as an adenosine receptor antagonist, this causes 
an increase in the number of excitatory neurotransmitters like dopa­
mine, reducing Parkinson’s outcomes (Machado-Filho et al., 2014). 
Furthermore, studies have also shown the inhibition of dopamine 
reduction caused by two caffeine metabolites: paraxanthine and 
theophylline (Camandola et al., 2019). 
In relation to ALS, the only association found is also related to the 
antagonism of adenosine receptors in the spinal cord, where an increase 
of motor neurons survival has been observed (Kolahdouzan & Hamadeh, 
2017). This was observed in an animal study which hypothesised that 
the inhibition of these receptors would be advantageous in ALS condi­
tions (Ng et al., 2015). 
Regarding MS, caffeine may supress the cytokines responsible for 
inflammatory processes, also through the antagonism of adenosine re­
ceptors, reducing consequently demyelination (Herden & Weissert, 
2018). In fact, animal studies with experimentally diseased rats and 
mice, demonstrated that the chronic use of caffeine substantially 
decreased inflammation (Chen et al., 2010; Tsutsui et al., 2004). 
Caffeine effects on HD are not yet fully understood. The only human 
study that has been performed suggested that caffeine may decrease the 
age at onset of the disease. This study is described in a more detailed way 
further on (Simonin et al., 2013). Other studies, namely animal in vivo 
investigations, are controversial (Kolahdouzan & Hamadeh, 2017). 
These findings may be related to the fact that this ND is a genetic dis­
order and, therefore, caffeine may have little influence on its onset or 
prevention. However, it is believed that caffeine may help decreasing 
the intensity of some symptoms, including improvement of motor 
function due to its adenosine antagonism, as well as reduction of 
oxidative damage. In summary, regarding HD and caffeine correlation, 
further investigation is needed (Mishra & Kumar, 2014). 
With regards to MJD, it was also shown an influence of caffeine on 
adenosine receptors using mice models and examining their brain 
morphological changes. The administration of caffeine caused a reduc­
tion of the neuronal degeneration and dysfunction which suggests a 
positive effect of caffeine on MJD associated pathology (Gonçalves et al., 
2013). 
Despite all this, there is evidence suggesting that other classes of 
compounds found in coffee may also largely contribute to its neuro­
protection potential against degeneration. 
Other methylxanthines have also been studied for their protective 
benefits, namely concerning AD. Regarding theobromine, it may reduce 
cognitive impairment and protect against amyloid neurotoxicity. In 
addition, theophylline acts as anti-inflammatory through the reduction 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines (O˜natibia-Astibia et al., 2017). 
Trigonelline has shown to improve memory impairments, charac­
teristic of AD, due to several properties as, for instance, its antioxidant 
potential (Chowdhury et al., 2018). 
Regarding phenolic compounds, a phenolic-rich diet, containing 
both flavonoids and non-flavonoids, revealed to be beneficial in atten­
uating several neurodegenerative symptoms and disease progression, 
such as PD and MS, mostly through antioxidant processes (D’Hooghe 
et al., 2013; Lange et al., 2019). Moreover, phenolic compounds are 
associated with the prevention of neuroinflammation and maintenance 
of the levels of stimulating neurotransmitters, such as noradrenaline and 
serotonin, whose absence may cause serious emotional problems (Hall 
et al., 2015). Similarly, these compounds are believed to improve 
cognitive performance (Potì et al., 2019). Therefore, since all these 
factors seem to be intimately related to this type of diseases, either as a 
cause or a consequence of neurodegeneration, it can be understood how 
useful phenolic compounds may be in these health conditions. Chloro­
genic acids (CGA), the major coffee phenolics, have shown to be effec­
tive against neurotoxicity. They present antioxidant properties, 
including action against free radicals and lipid peroxidation within 
cortical neurons, as well as by regulation of antioxidant enzymes (Kim 
et al., 2012; Tajik et al., 2017). These antioxidant activities within the 
brain have also been positively associated with the process of neuronal 
cells production, or neurogenesis, as well as with beneficial effects on 
induced amnesia (Grosso et al., 2017; Kwon et al., 2010). Additionally, 
CGA treatment has demonstrated to have an effect on the modulation of 
Fig. 2. Adenosine chemical structure. Similarity to caffeine molecule is evi­
denced in the blue box. 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
174
transcription factors that regulate pro-inflammatory cytokines, causing 
a decrease of neuroinflammation (Hall et al., 2015). Last of all, coffee 
phenolic compounds have been recently investigated regarding the 
reduced risk of AD, suggesting the involvement of CGA, particularly, in a 
decrease of the amount of Aβ plaques (Ishida et al., 2020). The influence 
of ferulic acid on serotonin levels have also been demonstrated. There­
fore, its antidepressant effects are evident. In addition, it has shown 
antioxidant powers and an elevation of neural cell levels. However, the 
concentrations of ferulic acid needed for achieving these effects are 
higher than those found in coffee. In what concerns to caffeic acid, it 
presented anti-inflammatory and potent antioxidant and free radical 
neutralisation properties, being of great importance in neuroprotection 
(Hall et al., 2015). 
Other less abundant coffee constituent, namely α-tocopherol [Fig. 1 
(J)], has shown neuroprotective activity, through antioxidant and 
radical scavenging processes, which has been related to the inhibition of 
some forms of neurotoxicity in PD (Inci et al., 1998; Speciale, 2002). One 
study demonstrated its effectiveness against memory impairment, which 
is also connected to neurodegenerative symptoms (Gutierres et al., 
2012). However, studies on this compound regarding coffee are scarce 
and, since its quantity in coffee is very low, the stated effects may not be 
associated with the beverage consumption, and therefore the need for 
further investigation is understandable. Tocopherols have already been 
stated as lipophilic molecules so, it is possible to infer that their anti­
oxidant capacity may take place in important brain and CNS regions 
(Alves et al., 2009a). 
As previously stated, coffee roasting promotes the formation of many 
new bioactive compounds, some of which have been recently studied 
regarding neuroprotective properties. Regarding CGA derivatives, CGA 
lactones, these have also been related to neuroprotection. Due to their 
lower polarity, these compounds present more permeability to the 
blood-brain barrier and, thus, bind to specific receptors on brain cells. 
Because of their antioxidant ability, they have protective effects against 
neurons oxidative damage and death (Farah, 2019). 
It has also been suggested that phenylindanes may be the responsible 
for several neuroprotection mechanisms of coffee against AD, such as 
the inhibition of Aβ aggregation. Mancini et al. (2018) investigated three 
coffee extracts and, through fluorescence assays, determined the level of 
inhibition of neurodegenerative characteristic protein aggregation. 
They found that phenylindanes, which were found in considerable 
concentrations in dark roasted coffee, presented a strong inhibitory ac­
tivity, suggesting their importance with regards to neuroprotection. 
Melanoidins enhance the antioxidant potential of roasted coffee in 
relation to green one and demonstrated to present a truly high antiox­
idant activity, mainly based on free radicals scavenging (Moreira et al., 
2012). Moreover, an animal study using rat models, in which a daily 
dose equivalent to 6 cups of espresso was administrated, investigated the 
anti-inflammatory mechanisms of this group of compounds, showing 
that coffee and its components, namely melanoidins, were able to 
diminish concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and enhance the 
amount of anti-inflammatory ones, like interleukins (IL) (Vitaglione 
et al., 2010). 
Concerning β-carbolines, harman and norharman, the structure of 
these compounds is extremely similar to the neurotoxin MPTP (1- 
methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) which is related to the 
development of PD. Therefore, they have been linked to the develop­
ment of such condition (Farah, 2019). However, on the other hand, 
these compounds have been recently investigated regarding some neu­
roprotective action. More specifically, β-carbolines can inhibit mono­
aminoxidases (MAO) in a reversible way, thereby promoting an increase 
in the concentration of neurotransmitters such as dopamine, with typi­
cally low levels within neurodegenerative conditions (Herraiz & Cha­
parro, 2006). Hence, these recent findings suggest that coffee 
β-carbolines can be, in fact, advantageous in terms of protection against 
neurodegenerative diseases. 
Finally, since serotonin is an endogenous neurotransmitter with a 
stimulating effect, its presence in roasted coffee suggests a positive effect 
against some characteristic outcomes and symptoms of neurodegener­
ative 
diseases 
(Martins 
& 
Gloria, 
2010). 
Eicosanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamide (EHT) is a derivative of serotonin 
which was found in vestigial amounts in coffee (Colombo & Papetti, 
2020). EHT shows antioxidant and anti-inflammatory actions. It inhibits 
some critical protein processes characteristic of pathophysiology of PD 
and AD conditions (Basurto-Islas et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2013). 
It is important to consider that most of the above mentioned mech­
anisms have been described after in vitro observations, using pure and/or 
single compounds, which may not express the exact conditions of real 
coffee consumption. In fact, the amount of such compounds in coffee 
are, most of the times, different than the studied ones, often consider­
ably lesser. Moreover, coffee intake is associated with several in­
teractions between its compounds and, thus, cannot be fully investigated 
through this type of research. Additionally, coffee compounds undergo 
specific metabolic processes within the body, which likewise may not be 
completely understood or mimic reality. These aspects raise the 
importance of in vivo studies. 
5.3. In vivo animal and human studies regarding coffee consumption 
The more relevant in vivo studies related to coffee consumption and 
neurodegenerative diseases are summarised in Table 1. It can be 
observed that relevant human studies have occurred more often than 
animal ones. In fact, in the latter, substances are administered individ­
ually most of the times, which results in less similarity to real conditions 
of coffee consumption. 
Within the human studies, there are several types of experimental 
designs, depending on the aim, sample or expected outcomes. For 
instance, epidemiological studies present some advantages in relation to 
others, such as being able to present a range of different diseases instead 
of only one type, and consider various environmental, biologic and 
clinical aspects which could comprise confounding factors that might in 
turn mislead to false concluded associations. 
Most of the human studies link the daily coffee intake patterns to 
values of caffeine or other coffee compound that is known to exist in the 
beverage (as shown in Table 1) to have an objective measurement of a 
specific parameter. This happens because the coffee species, the roasting 
degree, the brewing methods, among other factors, directly influence 
the coffee beverage composition. For example, American coffee is often 
drunk in much larger cups than European coffee, although this is usually 
denser and more concentrated (Qi & Li, 2014). Thus, all these factors 
vary with the country where the studies took place and their coffee 
culture. However, normally, the accepted standardised caffeine content 
is between 100 and 200 mg per cup (Folmer et al., 2017). Based on the 
responses of the subjects in the questionnaires for assessment of daily 
coffee intake, usually in cups per day, the studies estimate the amounts 
consumed, either quantitatively (in mg) or in terms of relative con­
sumption (e.g., high, low, etc.). 
Ritchie et al. (2010) studied the effects of caffeine on the neuropa­
thology of cognitive decline, and concluded that high doses of this 
substance, that is, more than 3 coffee cups per day, result in a lower 
white matter lesions volume, which in turn, is responsible for reduced 
cognitive decay. However, these findings were associated with gender 
difference, being observed only for women. Also, a 3-year follow-up 
cohort study with 531 Portuguese adults suggested that the associa­
tion between caffeine intake and cognitive decline might be 
gender-dependent. The results enabled to find a significant association 
for women but only possible for men (Santos et al., 2010b). These 
conclusions may be elucidated by a 2020 cross-sectional survey whose 
aim was to find a correlation between coffee, decaffeinated coffee or 
caffeine intake and cognitive performance and whose results indicated 
that, in general, women are more susceptible to the effects of caffeine 
than men (Dong et al., 2020). 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
175
In terms of diseases, general neurological conditions or cognitive 
impairment have been the most explored areas, accounting for 7 found 
papers in total. Apart from the three already mentioned, two of which 
also studied the effects of caffeine specifically, the others intended to 
infer on the role of coffee consumption. Ding et al. (2015) inversely 
associated coffee consumption to the risk of death due to neurodegen­
erative diseases. In a similar way, Haller et al. (2018) in a cohort study of 
3 years with cognitively preserved elderly subjects not only found a 
positive correlation between chronic coffee intake and benefits on 
cognitive performance, but also an association between moderate to 
heavy consumption and an enhanced brain blood-flow, which supports 
coffee neurological positive effect. Furthermore, a meta-analysis by Wu 
et al. (2017) about 9 prospective cohort studies which accounted 34,282 
subjects in total also concluded that coffee intake represented a lower 
risk of developing cognitive disorders, and that this relationship was 
dose dependent. In fact, this lower risk was found to appear at 1–2 cups 
of coffee per day. On the contrary, Gelber et al. (2011) investigated the 
relationship between midlife coffee consumption and late life develop­
ment of cognitive impairment or dementia but did not find significant 
associations. Nevertheless, in the same case-control study, the authors 
also examined brain autopsies conducted in 418 decedent participants, 
concluding that the highest-level coffee consumers had lower risk of 
developing neuropathologic lesions, supporting the idea of some 
neurological beneficial effect of coffee. 
Recently, Sedaghat et al. (2019) performed a study using male rats 
with induced AD and verified that this condition resulted in memory 
impairment and increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines within the 
hippocampus region. Moreover, this work, which involved the oral 
administration of brewed coffee (BC) to rats, concluded that 
pre-treatment with BC enabled to improve memory, reduced inflam­
matory cytokines and restored antioxidant balance, therefore amelio­
rating AD symptoms. 
Cao et al. (2012) were the first to investigate the influence of coffee 
intake on the risk of dementia in patients with initial mild cognitive 
impairment by directly measuring caffeine plasma levels. They also 
found a positive and beneficial association between AD or related con­
ditions and coffee consumption. Specifically, high levels of caffeine were 
in close correlation with the inhibition of progression of a mild cognitive 
impairment condition to a dementia state. The authors suggested this 
could be intimately related to the effects of caffeine on key cytokines 
levels, since these decreased in patients whose condition evolved into 
dementia but remained higher in stable mild cognitive impairment 
subjects. Another cross-sectional study that involved collection of bio­
logical samples and their subsequent analysis by instrumental methods 
was based on the possible mechanism of inhibition of Aβ secretion 
pathways by caffeine, which in turn may decrease its levels in the ce­
rebrospinal fluid (CSF). It was concluded that a positive association with 
reduced levels of this protein was linked to another methylxanthine, 
theobromine, rather than caffeine. Therefore, this work laid emphasis on 
the neuroprotective role of this methylxanthine (Travassos et al., 2015). 
Furthermore, in regard to amyloid-β related neuropathophysiology, a 
prospective cohort study by Kim et al. (2019), who observed both 
non-demented and mild cognitive impairment diagnosed patients, in 
complement with neuroimaging procedures, suggested that daily coffee 
intakes of more than 2 cups were highly associated with reduced levels 
of protein accumulation. These findings are supported by a recent ani­
mal study, previously mentioned in the present work, which investi­
gated the role of coffee CGA, namely 5-CQA, in reduced risk of AD. 
Ishida et al. (2020) used a transgenic mouse model of AD and concluded 
after immunohistochemical analysis that treatment with phenolic 
compounds, particularly 5-CQA as one of the main polyphenols of cof­
fee, reduced Aβ quantities within the brain. In fact, the authors verified 
that the compound did not inhibit Aβ fibrillation, but degraded Aβ 
plaques, reducing its accumulation. Kim et al. (2019) also found that, 
within the cohort, lifetime consumption showed more significance than 
more recent coffee intakes, suggesting that chronic effects of coffee, that 
is, a continued exposure, is more efficient against AD. 
In addition, 5 articles investigating coffee intake and Parkinson’s 
condition were found. As previously stated, this is the neurodegenera­
tive disease, which is more strongly inversely associated with coffee or, 
more specifically, with caffeine effects. 
Conversely to the findings of the last-mentioned study, a 2018 case- 
control study did not find an association between the number of years a 
patient consumed coffee and significant changes in the striatum region 
of the brain, meaning that chronic consumption may not be significant 
in PD conditions improvement. On the other hand, the same study 
observed a beneficial association between coffee consumption and an 
increasing age of PD onset (Gigante et al., 2018). 
Two 2014 studies, comprising a case-control and a meta-analysis, 
respectively, also studied the effects of coffee and caffeine on PD. Both 
works related these to a decreased risk of developing PD. Moreover, the 
first concluded that this risk was even lower for heavy daily caffeine 
intakes (more than 237.8 mg) and meta-analysis stated the maximum 
protection to be at 2–3 cups of coffee per day (Qi & Li, 2014; Yama­
da-Fowler et al., 2014). 
Regarding the reduction of symptoms, a longitudinal cohort study 
which took 4 years of observation of newly diagnosed patients, 
demonstrated that coffee intake was associated with less motor and non- 
motor PD symptoms after that period (Moccia et al., 2016). Similarly, a 
more recent cross-sectional study found association between coffee and 
non-motor symptoms, as well. Nevertheless, although the prevalence 
was not changed, the intensity of the symptoms was reduced (Cho et al., 
2018). 
Coffee has also been studied regarding amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Beghi et al. (2011) proposed to investigate this association and found 
that current coffee drinkers (vs former or never-drinkers), independently 
of dosage, show reduced risk of ALS. However, Fondell et al. (2015) 
analysed 5 large cohort studies and concluded the opposite, suggesting 
that caffeine intake, including caffeine from coffee did not show any 
relation to the risk of ALS. The justification for this difference remains 
unclear demonstrating the need for further investigation. Moreover, 
dementia with Lewy bodies and its correlation with coffee consumption 
has been studied, since this disease comprises a relatively high per­
centage of all dementia cases. Boot et al. (2013) investigated 19 possible 
risk factors for the disease and prior caffeine consumption was found to 
be related to reduced DLB diagnoses, even more strongly than to AD or 
PD. 
Two articles suggested the beneficial effect of coffee consumption in 
multiple sclerosis. A Swedish analysis of two case-control studies by 
Hedstr¨om et al. (2016) reported a decreased risk of development of this 
condition, whereas D’Hooghe et al. (2012), using a cross-sectional sur­
vey, found that it could be associated with a reduced likelihood of 
reaching moderate disability (6 in a scale of 0–10) in relapsing MS but 
not in progressive MS. Both studies associated these outcomes with high 
coffee intakes (D’Hooghe et al., 2012; Hedstr¨om et al., 2016). 
Regarding Huntington’s disease, according to what has been previ­
ously stated, the only conducted human study concluded a negative 
effect of coffee, namely caffeine, on the onset of this disorder (Simonin 
et al., 2013). In fact, Simonin et al. (2013) developed a 2-year follow-up 
study, and their findings suggested that patients recording higher 
caffeine intakes, of about 190 mg/day, were the ones presenting the first 
symptoms of the disease earlier in age. This difference was calculated 
and settled as being 4 years, which is fairly relevant since HD patient’s 
lifetime is 15–20 years after onset. In addition, this study, which com­
prises one of the few rare investigations on HD and an environmental 
factor, showed there was no correlation between caffeine intake and the 
progression of motor function. Contrarily to AD or PD in which func­
tional foods, such as coffee, may somehow influence the prevention or 
intensity of the symptoms, in HD, since it is defined as a genetic disease, 
as previously stated, this may not be observed. Therefore, this might 
explain both the lack of studies and the discrepancy of the findings. 
A relevant animal study investigated the interaction between 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
176
caffeine and other components of coffee in order to enable neuro­
protection through increasing key cytokines level in plasma. Using 
transgenic AD and non-transgenic mice, administrating caffeine, coffee 
and decaffeinated coffee, and using both instrumental determinations 
and observational methods, Cao et al. (2011) performed two types of 
treatments (acute and long-termed), and found out that coffee, but not 
decaffeinated coffee nor caffeine alone, produce an increase in key cy­
tokines which allow neurons to survive, providing neuroprotective ef­
fects in AD conditions. In the same way, a recent study observed the lack 
of correlation between decaffeinated coffee and cognitive behaviour, 
suggesting this does not have any influence on cognitive disorders (Dong 
et al., 2020). This might be elucidated by the main conclusion of the first 
article, which states that caffeine may have these neuroprotective effects 
through a synergistic action with another coffee component, supporting 
the results of the lack of association with decaffeinated coffee – whose 
caffeine amounts are vestigial – and caffeine alone – which does not 
contain other non-caffeine coffee components. In fact, EHT may be one 
of these compounds, according to a recent study using PD and DLB 
models (Yan et al., 2018). Moreover, it is known when coffee undergoes 
decaffeination, this affects its entire composition since more com­
pounds, apart from caffeine, are extracted. For instance, decaffeinated 
coffee presents lower antioxidant properties (~30%) in relation to reg­
ular coffee (Farah, 2019). 
Apart from this, an older study by Xu et al. (2010) suggested that 
neuroprotective effects of caffeine might be prolonged by the simulta­
neous activity of its main metabolites, which brings forward, one more 
time, the importance of the original and complete coffee beverage 
containing all its original substances for a more efficient neuroprotective 
potential. 
6. Conclusions and future trends 
Coffee is a widely recognised and consumed beverage around the 
world, present in many countries and accepted by many cultures, since 
drinking coffee is a pleasure for most people, due to its stimulant effects 
and attractive taste. Although for many years the general idea was that 
coffee was harmful and associated with health risks, in the last years, 
studies and investigation allow to demystify this concept and it has 
started to be considered as a truly beneficial substance. For this reason, 
its health benefits have been researched and are extensively docu­
mented; today, EFSA supports the idea that a moderate consumption of 
coffee (3–4 cups) is good for health. However, the field of investigation 
is many times complex and, thus, the range of existing studies within this 
topic comprise countless results, conclusions, which sometimes are even 
contradictory. 
In terms of global health, regarding the current world population and 
since it is becoming older, neurological conditions, namely neurode­
generative diseases, comprise a major health problem. In fact, it is 
believed that in 10 years the number of people suffering from a neuro­
degenerative disorder will reach 75 million, a figure expected to almost 
double until 2050. These are highly associated with severe cognitive 
impairment, or dementia, apart from some motor disabilities, situations 
that debilitate patients and have great negative influence on their well- 
being and independence. Hence, without any doubt it is of extreme 
importance to better understand these conditions both for developing 
ways of prevention as well as ameliorate patients’ lives since, as for 
today, no cure is available, and treatments rely only on the possible 
decrease of some symptom’s intensity. There is, therefore, a need for 
prevention strategies, as well as ways of slow or stop disease 
progression. 
Coffee has been extensively and strongly related to this issue, since 
research has reported numerous neuroprotective effects and the risk of 
specific neurodegenerative diseases have been demonstrated to decrease 
due to moderate and, sometimes, even high coffee intake. Parkinson’s 
and Alzheimer’s are two of the main neurodegenerative diseases and 
their inverse association with coffee consumption has become evident, 
mostly in the last 10 years. Other neurodegenerative conditions, 
including several rarer, have not been neglected and this correlation has 
also been demonstrated to be positive in several cases. In addition, 
studies suggested these correlations may be gender-dependent – women 
are more prone to neuroprotective effects –, dose-dependent – high in­
takes and chronic/prolonged exposure have been more strongly asso­
ciated – and in some cases genotype-dependent. Nevertheless, there are 
a few studies that do not show an association between coffee and a 
decreased risk of neurodegenerative diseases, or even show a negative 
association, meaning an adverse effect. However, as we could realise 
with the present review for all the research and evidence found, articles 
showing negative or inexistent correlations are considerably lesser and, 
although ought be taken into account, the studies design, the pertinence 
of data and methods, statistics and studies limitations, must also be 
compared and evaluated as they may justify the difference in results and 
the negative connotation of coffee with regards to neuroprotective po­
tential that is therefore concluded. 
For this reason, notwithstanding all the research found, the use of 
coffee as a preventive factor against neurodegenerative diseases cannot 
yet be fully recognised. More investigation, including controlled trials 
and more cohort studies with long-term observations, is still necessary. 
Meanwhile, it may be regarded as a positive complement to the treat­
ment of neurodegenerative diseases. 
In the present work, some relevant research on the topic of coffee and 
neurodegeneration have been revised, however, a lack of studies 
mentioning some of these compounds and their neuroprotection ca­
pacity has been observed. In fact, the main aim of this review was to 
understand the real impact of the coffee beverage on neurodegenerative 
diseases by revising papers concerning in vivo studies where the con­
sumption of the coffee brew was conducted, instead of performing an 
administration of isolated compounds. Nevertheless, all the relevant 
studies that, additionally, emphasised the action of one specific com­
pound, focused on caffeine or its metabolites. This situation brings for­
ward one limitation of these studies. On the other hand, research that 
focus on other bioactive coffee compounds also has limitations. Ac­
cording to what has been said, such studies include the administration of 
isolated substances, which does not allow compounds to interact, and 
most of the times use quantities that do not represent the true relative 
amounts within the body, which make impossible to achieve trusted 
representations of the reality. That is, in fact, the main reason for which 
these have not been included in this work. 
Regarding the topic of the interactions between coffee compounds, 
research has emphasised its importance, and has suggested that the lack 
of one substance may inhibit all the effects. Such conclusion can be 
linked to some findings about the absence of association between neu­
roprotective potential and both isolated caffeine from coffee and 
decaffeinated coffee. Moreover, some of these interactions are proposed 
to be synergistic, meaning that caffeine neuronal effects are stronger, 
and sometimes longer, in combination with other compounds. Apart 
from that, relative quantities of substances can also be easily associated 
with the occurrence of these interactions and, consequently, the ex­
pected health outcomes. For this reason and bearing in mind the sig­
nificance of further research on the topic of coffee neuroprotective 
potential for an eventual approval of coffee as a novel preventive factor, 
it becomes important to clearly know the amounts of coffee compounds 
in the beverage and to verify if these do not suffer considerable changes, 
in order to guarantee eventual proven benefits. 
Roasting, as previously stated, is a complex process known for 
modifying coffee composition by significantly eliminating some com­
pounds and generating new ones. Similarly, the stage of storing coffee 
beans after roasting has been recently investigated regarding modifi­
cations on the beans composition. In fact, it has been found that most 
phenolic components undergo extra degradation during this step of 
storage, mainly chlorogenic acids which are important elements of 
coffee antioxidant capacity (Kr´ol et al., 2020). As a result, importance 
arises regarding the necessity of this step in the coffee industry and the 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
177
need for acknowledgment of compositional changes. Indeed, further 
work should focus on the development of analytical determinations 
immediately after roasting and during coffee storage for the assessment 
of coffee composition, in order to assure minor changes and a possible 
and useful field of quality control within the coffee industry. 
Acknowledgements 
Rita C. Alves is grateful to Fundaç˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia 
(FCT) for the CEECIND/01120/2017 contract. This work was supported 
by AgriFood XXI I&D&I project (NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000041) co- 
financed by ERDF through NORTE 2020 (Programa Operacional 
Regional do Norte 2014/2020); by the UIDB/50006/2020 project with 
funding from FCT/MCTES through Portuguese funds and by the 
U2SCOFFEE project (POCI/01/0247/FEDER/033351) financed by 
ERDF. 
References 
Agudelo-Ochoa, G. M., Pulgarín-Zapata, I. C., Vel´asquez-Rodriguez, C. M., Duque- 
Ramírez, M., Naranjo-Cano, M., Quintero-Ortiz, M. M., et al. (2016). Coffee 
consumption increases the antioxidant capacity of plasma and has no effect on the 
lipid profile or vascular function in healthy adults in a randomized controlled trial. 
The Journal of Nutrition, 146, 524–531. https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.115.224774 
Almeida, A. A. P., Farah, A., Silva, D. A. M., Nunan, E. A., & Gl´oria, M. B. A. (2006). 
Antibacterial activity of coffee extracts and selected coffee chemical compounds 
against enterobacteria. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 54, 8738–8743. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jf0617317 
Alves, R. C., Casal, S., & Oliveira, M. B. P. P. (2007). Factors influencing the norharmn 
and harmas contents in espresso coffee. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
55, 1832–1838. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf063128u 
Alves, R. C., Casal, S., & Oliveira, B. (2009a). Benefícios do caf´e na saúde: Mito ou 
realidade? Química Nova, 32, 2169–2180. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0100- 
40422009000800031 
Alves, R. C., Casal, S., Alves, M. R., & Oliveira, M. B. (2009b). Discrimination between 
arabica and robusta coffee species on the basis of their tocopherol profiles. Food 
Chemistry, 114, 295–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2008.08.093 
Alves, R. C., Casal, S., & Oliveira, M. B. P. P. (2009c). Tocopherols in espresso coffee: 
Analytical method development and validation. Food Chemistry, 115, 1549–1555. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.01.068 
Alves, R. C., Costa, A. S., Jerez, M., Casal, S., Sineiro, J., Nú˜nez, M. J., et al. (2010a). 
Antiradical activity, phenolics profile, and hydroxymethylfurfural in espresso coffee: 
Influence of technological factors. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 58, 
12221–12229. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf1031229 
Alves, R. C., Casal, S., & Oliveira, M. B. P. P. (2010b). Tocopherols in coffee brews: 
Influence of coffee species, roast degree and brewing procedure. Journal of Food 
Composition and Analysis, 23, 802–808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2010.02.009 
Alves, R. C., Rodrigues, F., Nunes, M. A., Vinha, A. F., & Oliveira, M. B. P. P. (2017). State 
of the art in coffee processing by-products. In C. M. Galanakis (Ed.), Handbook of 
coffee processing by-products (pp. 1–26). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
Associaç˜ao Alzheimer Portugal A Doença de Alzheimer. (2020). https://alzheimerpor 
tugal.org/pt/text-0-9-30-14-a-doenca-de-alzheimer. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Associaç˜ao Portuguesa de Esclerose Lateral Amiotr´ofica. (2018). O que e a ELA?. htt 
ps://www.apela.pt/page/17/o-que-e-a-ela. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Basurto-Islas, G., Blanchard, J., Tung, Y. C., Fernandez, J. R., Voronkov, M., Stock, M., 
et al. (2014). Therapeutic benefits of a component of coffee in a rat model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging, 35, 2701–2712. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.06.012 
Beghi, E., Pupillo, E., Messina, P., Giussani, G., Chi`o, A., Zoccolella, S., et al. (2011). 
Coffee and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A possible preventive role. American 
Journal of Epidemiology, 174, 1002–1008. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwr229 
Bizzo, M. L. G., Farah, A., Kemp, J. A., & Scancetti, L. B. (2015). Highlights in the history 
of coffee science related to health. In V. R. Preedy (Ed.), Coffee in health and disease 
prevention (pp. 11–17). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
Boot, B. P., Orr, C. F., Ahlskog, J. E., Ferman, T. J., Roberts, R., Pankratz, V. S., et al. 
(2013). Risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies: A case-control study. Neurology, 
81, 833–840. https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000446501.19131.4d 
Bufalo, M. C., Fereira, I., Costa, G., Francisco, V., Liberal, J., Cruz, M. T., et al. (2013). 
Propolis and its constituent caffeic acid suppress LPS-stimulated pro-inflammatory 
response by blocking NF-κB and MAPK activation in macrophages. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology, 149, 84–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2013.06.004 
Camandola, S., Plick, N., & Mattson, M. P. (2019). Impact of coffee and cacao purine 
metabolites on neuroplasticity and neurodegenerative disease. Neurochemical 
Research, 44, 214–227. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-018-2492-0 
Cao, C., Loewenstein, D. A., Lin, X., Zhang, C., Wang, L., Duara, R., et al. (2012). High 
blood caffeine levels in MCI linked to lack of progression to dementia. Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease, 30, 559–572. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2012-111781 
Cao, C., Wang, L., Lin, X., Mamcarz, M., Zhang, C., Bai, G., et al. (2011). Caffeine 
synergizes with another coffee component to increase plasma GCSF: Linkage to 
cognitive benefits in Alzheimer’s mice. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 25, 323–335. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2011-110110 
Casal, S. (2015). Neuroactive β-carbolines norharman and harman in coffee. In 
V. R. Preedy (Ed.), Coffee in health and disease prevention (pp. 737–743). Cambridge, 
MA: Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409517-5.00082-6.  
Cavin, C., Holzhaeuser, D., Scharf, G., Constable, A., Huber, W. W., & Schilter, B. (2002). 
Cafestol and kahweol, two coffee specific diterpenes with anticarcinogenic activity. 
Food and Chemical Toxicology, 40, 1155–1163. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-6915 
(02)00029-7 
Chen, G. Q., Chen, Y. Y., Wang, X. S., Wu, S. Z., Yang, H. M., Xu, H. Q., et al. (2010). 
Chronic caffeine treatment attenuates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
induced by Guinea pig spinal cord homogenates in Wistar rats. Brain Research, 1309, 
116–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.10.054 
Cho, B. H., Choi, S. M., Kim, J. T., & Kim, B. C. (2018). Association of coffee consumption 
and non-motor symptoms in drug-naïve, early-stage Parkinson’s disease. 
Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 50, 42–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
parkreldis.2018.02.016 
Chowdhury, A. A., Gawali, N. B., Bulani, V. D., Kothavade, P. S., Mestry, S. N., 
Deshpande, P. S., et al. (2018). In vitro antiglycating effect and in vivo 
neuroprotective activity of trigonelline in d-galactose induced cognitive impairment. 
Pharmacological Reports, 70, 372–377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pharep.2017.09.006 
Clark, I., & Landolt, H. P. (2017). Coffee, caffeine, and sleep: A systematic review of 
epidemiological studies and randomized controlled trials. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 31, 
70–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2016.01.006 
Colombo, R., & Papetti, A. (2020). An outlook on the role of decaffeinated coffee in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 60, 
760–779. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1550384 
Contaldo, F., Santarpia, L., & Pasanisi, F. (2019). Chronic inflammatory liver diseases 
and coffee intake. Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care, 22, 
389–392. https://doi.org/10.1097/MCO.0000000000000586 
Costa, J., Lunet, N., Santos, C., Santos, J., & Vaz-Carneiro, A. (2010). Caffeine exposure 
and the risk of Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 20, S221–S238. https://doi.org/ 
10.3233/JAD-2010-091525 
D’Hooghe, M. B., Haentjens, P., Nagels, G., & De Keyser, J. (2012). Alcohol, coffee, fish, 
smoking and disease progression in multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 
19, 616–624. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-1331.2011.03596.x 
D’Hooghe, M., Nagels, G., De Keyser, J., & Haentjens, P. (2013). Self-reported health 
promotion and disability progression in multiple sclerosis. Journal of the Neurological 
Sciences, 325, 120–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2012.12.018 
Ding, M., Satija, A., Bhupathiraju, S. N., Hu, Y., Sun, Q., Han, J., et al. (2015). 
Association of coffee consumption with total and cause-specific mortality in 3 large 
prospective cohorts. Circulation, 132, 2305–2315. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.115.017341 
Dong, X., Li, S., Sun, J., Li, Y., & Zhang, D. (2020). Association of coffee, decaffeinated 
coffee and caffeine intake from coffee with cognitive performance in older adults: 
National health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) 2011-2014. Nutrients, 
12, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12030840 
EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products Nutrition Allergies. (2015). Scientific opinion on the 
safety of caffeine. EFSA Journal, 13(4102). https://doi.org/10.2903/j. 
efsa.2015.4102 
Esquivel, P., & Jim´enez, V. M. (2012). Functional properties of coffee and coffee by- 
products. Food Research International, 46, 488–495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodres.2011.05.028 
FAO. (2003). Coffee. In Medium-term prospects for agricultural commodities: Projections to 
the year 2010. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.  
Farah, A. (2019). Coffee: Consumption and health implications. London: Royal Society of 
Chemistry.  
Farah, A., & Santos, T. F. (2015). The coffee plant and beans: An introduction. In 
V. R. Preedy (Ed.), Coffee in health and disease prevention (pp. 5–10). Cambridge, MA: 
Academic Press.  
Ferreira, T., Shulerb, J., Guimar˜aes, R., & Farah, A. (2019). Introduction to coffee plant 
and genetics. In A. Farah (Ed.), Coffee: Production, quality and chemistry (pp. 3–25). 
London: Royal Society of Chemistry.  
Folmer, B., Farah, A., Jones, L., & Fogliano, V. (2017). Human wellbeing – sociability, 
performance, and health. In B. Folmer (Ed.), The Craft and Science of Coffee (pp. 
493–520). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
Fondell, E., O’Reilly, E. I., Fitzgerald, K. C., Falcone, G. J., Kolonel, L. N., Park, Y., et al. 
(2015). Intakes of caffeine, coffee and tea and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: 
Results from five cohort studies. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal 
Degeneration, 16, 366–371. https://doi.org/10.3109/21678421.2015.1020813 
Franca, A. S., Mendonça, J. C. F., & Oliveira, S. D. (2005). Composition of green and 
roasted coffees of different cup qualities. Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und -Technologie- 
Food Science and Technology, 38, 709–715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
lwt.2004.08.014 
Franca, A. S., & Oliveira, L. S. (2016). Coffee and its by-products as sources of bioactive 
compounds. In J. L. Massey (Ed.), Coffee: Production, consumption and health benefits 
(pp. 1–28). New York: Nova Publishers.  
Fundaç˜ao Calouste Gulbenkian. (2015). Dossier ciˆencia em cena: O c´erebro e as doenças 
neurodegenerativas. https://content.gulbenkian.pt/wp-content/uploads/sites/16/ 
2018/04/24100926/Dossie_2015_Neurodegenerativas.pdf. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Gelber, R. P., Petrovitch, H., Masaki, K. H., Ross, G. W., & White, L. R. (2011). Coffee 
intake in midlife and risk of dementia and its neuropathologic correlates. Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease, 23, 607–615. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2010-101428 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
178
Gigante, A. F., Asabella, A. N., Iliceto, G., Martino, T., Ferrari, C., Defazio, G., et al. 
(2018). Chronic coffee consumption and striatal DAT-SPECT findings in Parkinson’s 
disease. Neurological Sciences, 39, 551–555. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-018- 
3253-1 
G¨okcen, B. B., & S¸anlier, N. (2019). Coffee consumption and disease correlations. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 59, 336–348. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10408398.2017.1369391 
Gonçalves, N., Sim˜oes, A. T., Cunha, R. A., & de Almeida, L. P. (2013). Caffeine and 
adenosine A(2A) receptor inactivation decrease striatal neuropathology in a 
lentiviral-based model of Machado-Joseph disease. Annals of Neurology, 73, 
655–666. https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.23866 
Grosso, G., Godos, J., Galvano, F., & Giovannucci, E. L. (2017). Coffee, caffeine, and 
health outcomes: An umbrella review. Annual Review of Nutrition, 37, 131–156. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-nutr-071816-064941 
Gutierres, J. M., Carvalho, F. B., Rosa, M. M., Schmatz, R., Rodrigues, M., Vieira, J. M., 
et al. (2012). Protective effect of α-Tocopherol on memory deficits and Na+,K+- 
ATPase and acetylcholinesterase activities in rats with diet-induced 
hypercholesterolemia. Biomedicine & Aging Pathology, 2, 73–80. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biomag.2012.03.004 
Hall, S., Desbrow, B., Anoopkumar-Dukie, S., Davey, A. K., Arora, D., McDermott, C., 
et al. (2015). A review of the bioactivity of coffee, caffeine and key coffee 
constituents on inflammatory responses linked to depression. Food Research 
International, 76, 626–636. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2015.07.027 
Haller, S., Montandon, M. L., Rodriguez, C., Herrmann, F. R., & Giannakopoulos, P. 
(2018). Impact of coffee, wine, and chocolate consumption on cognitive outcome 
and MRI parameters in old age. Nutrients, 10(1391). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nu10101391 
Hedstr¨om, A. K., Mowry, E. M., Gianfrancesco, M. A., Shao, X., Schaefer, C. A., Shen, L., 
et al. (2016). High consumption of coffee is associated with decreased multiple 
sclerosis risk; results from two independent studies. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 87, 454–460. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2015- 
312176 
Hemmati-Dinarvand, M., Saedi, S., Valilo, M., Kalantary-Charvadeh, A., Alizadeh 
Sani, M., Kargar, R., et al. (2019). Oxidative stress and Parkinson’s disease: Conflict 
of oxidant-antioxidant systems. Neuroscience Letters, 709, 134296. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134296 
Herden, L., & Weissert, R. (2018). The impact of coffee and caffeine on multiple sclerosis 
compared to other neurodegenerative diseases. Frontiers in Nutrition, 5(133). https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2018.00133 
Herraiz, T., & Chaparro, C. (2006). Human monoamine oxidase enzyme inhibition by 
coffee and β-carbolines norharman and harman isolated from coffee. Life Sciences, 
78, 795–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2005.05.074 
Huang, M., Gu, X., & Gao, X. (2019). 13-Nanotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of 
neurodegenerative diseases. In H. Gao, & X. Gao (Eds.), Brain targeted drug delivery 
system: A focus on nanotechnology and nanoparticulates (pp. 321–356). Cambridge, 
MA: Academic Press.  
ICO. (2020a). International coffee Organization: World coffee consumption. htt 
p://www.ico.org/prices/new-consumption-table.pdf/. (Accessed 11 March 2020). 
ICO. (2020b). International coffee Organization: ICO indicator prices - January 2020. 
http://www.ico.org/prices/p1-January2020.pdf/. (Accessed 11 March 2020). 
ICO. (2020c). International Coffee Organization: Monthly export statistics (members & 
non-members). May 2020 http://www.ico.org/prices/m1-exports.pdf/. (Accessed 
11 March 2020). 
Inci, S., ¨Ozcan, O. E., & Kilinç, K. (1998). Time-level relationship for lipid peroxidation 
and the protective effect of α-tocopherol in experimental mild and severe brain 
injury. Neurosurgery, 43, 330–335. https://doi.org/10.1097/00006123-199808000- 
00095 
Institute for Scientific Information on Coffee. (2019). Expert report: Cognitive Decline, 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases - does dietary pattern play a role?. https:// 
www.coffeeandhealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/ISIC-neurodegenerative 
-expert-report_Final.pdf. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Ishida, K., Yamamoto, M., Misawa, K., Nishimura, H., Misawa, K., Ota, N., et al. (2020). 
Coffee polyphenols prevent cognitive dysfunction and suppress amyloid β plaques in 
APP/PS2 transgenic mouse. Neuroscience Research, 154, 35–44. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neures.2019.05.001 
Jaquet, M., Rochat, I., Moulin, J., Cavin, C., & Bibiloni, R. (2009). Impact of coffee 
consumption on the gut microbiota: A human volunteer study. International Journal 
of Food Microbiology, 130, 117–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijfoodmicro.2009.01.011 
Jeszka-Skowron, M., Frankowski, R., & Zgoła-Grze´skowiak, A. (2020). Comparison of 
methylxantines, trigonelline, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide contents in brews of 
green and processed Arabica and Robusta coffee beans – influence of steaming, 
decaffeination and roasting processes on coffee beans. LWT, 125(109344). https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109344 
JPND Research. (2019). What is neurodegenerative disease?. https://www.neuro 
degenerationresearch.eu/what/. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Kim, J. W., Byun, M. S., Yi, D., Lee, J. H., Jeon, S. Y., Jung, G., et al. (2019). Coffee intake 
and decreased amyloid pathology in human brain. Translational Psychiatry, 9(270). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-019-0604-5 
Kim, J., Lee, S., Shim, J., Kim, H. W., Kim, J., Jang, Y. J., et al. (2012). Caffeinated coffee, 
decaffeinated coffee, and the phenolic phytochemical chlorogenic acid up-regulate 
NQO1 expression and prevent H₂O₂-induced apoptosis in primary cortical neurons. 
Neurochemistry International, 60, 466–474. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuint.2012.02.004 
Kolahdouzan, M., & Hamadeh, M. J. (2017). The neuroprotective effects of caffeine in 
neurodegenerative diseases. CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 23, 272–290. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.12684 
Kr´ol, K., Gantner, M., Tatarak, A., & Hallmann, E. (2020). The content of polyphenols in 
coffee beans as roasting, origin and storage effect. European Food Research and 
Technology, 246, 33–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00217-019-03388-9 
Kwon, S. H., Lee, H. K., Kim, J. A., Hong, S. I., Kim, H. C., Jo, T. H., et al. (2010). 
Neuroprotective effects of chlorogenic acid on scopolamine-induced amnesia via 
anti-acetylcholinesterase and anti-oxidative activities in mice. European Journal of 
Pharmacology, 649, 210–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.001 
Lai, B. C. L., & Tsui, J. K. C. (2001). Epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease. British Columbia 
Medical Journal, 43, 133–137. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017-1686-y 
Lange, K. W., Nakamura, Y., Chen, N., Guo, J., Kanaya, S., Lange, K. M., et al. (2019). 
Diet and medical foods in Parkinson’s disease. Food Science and Human Wellness, 8, 
83–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fshw.2019.03.006 
Lee, K. W., Im, J. Y., Woo, J. M., Grosso, H., Kim, Y. S., Cristovao, A. C., et al. (2013). 
Neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties of a coffee component in the 
MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurotherapeutics, 10, 143–153. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s13311-012-0165-2 
Loader, T. B., Taylor, C. G., Zahradka, P., & Jones, P. J. (2017). Chlorogenic acid from 
coffee beans: evaluating the evidence for a blood pressure-regulating health claim. 
Nutrition Reviews, 75, 114–133. https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nuw057 
Machado-Filho, J. A., Correia, A. O., Montenegro, A. B., Nobre, M. E., Cerqueira, G. S., 
Neves, K. R., et al. (2014). Caffeine neuroprotective effects on 6-OHDA-lesioned rats 
are mediated by several factors, including pro-inflammatory cytokines and histone 
deacetylase inhibitions. Behavioural Brain Research, 264, 116–125. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbr.2014.01.051 
Madeira, M. H., Boia, R., Ambr´osio, A. F., & Santiago, A. R. (2017). Having a coffee 
break: The impact of caffeine consumption on microglia-mediated inflammation in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Mediators of Inflammation, 2017(4761081). https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2017/4761081 
Mancini, R. S., Wang, Y., & Weaver, D. F. (2018). Phenylindanes in brewed coffee inhibit 
amyloid-beta and tau aggregation. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 12(35). https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fnins.2018.00735 
Martins, A. C. C. L., & Gloria, M. B. A. (2010). Changes on the levels of serotonin 
precursors – tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptophan – during roasting of arabica and 
robusta coffee. Food Chemistry, 118, 529–533. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodchem.2009.05.016 
Miranda, J., Monteiro, L., Albuquerque, R., Pacheco, J. J., Khan, Z., Lopez-Lopez, J., 
et al. (2017). Coffee is protective against oral and pharyngeal cancer: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Medicina Oral, Patología Oral y Cirugía Bucal, 22, 554–561. 
https://doi.org/10.4317/medoral.21829 
Mishra, J., & Kumar, A. (2014). Improvement of mitochondrial NAD(+)/FAD(+)-linked 
state-3 respiration by caffeine attenuates quinolinic acid induced motor impairment 
in rats: Implications in Huntington’s disease. Pharmacological Reports, 66, 
1148–1155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharep.2014.07.006 
Moccia, M., Erro, R., Picillo, M., Vitale, C., Longo, K., Amboni, M., et al. (2016). Caffeine 
consumption and the 4-year progression of de novo Parkinson’s disease. 
Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 32, 116–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
parkreldis.2016.08.005 
Moreira, A. S., Nunes, F. M., Domingues, M. R., & Coimbra, M. A. (2012). Coffee 
melanoidins: Structures, mechanisms of formation and potential health impacts. 
Food & Function, 3, 903–915. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2fo30048f 
Morisco, F., Lembo, V., Mazzone, G., Camera, S., & Caporaso, N. (2014). Coffee and liver 
health. Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology, 48, S87–S90. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
MCG.0000000000000240 
MSD. (2019). Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Other Motor Neuron Diseases 
(MNDs). https://www.msdmanuals. 
com/en-pt/professional/neurologic-disorders/periph 
eral-nervous-system-and-motor-unit-disorders/amyotroph 
ic-lateral-sclerosis-als-and-other-motor-neuron-diseases-mnds#v1045886. (Accessed 
10 July 2020). 
MSD. (2020). Huntington Disease. https://www.msdmanuals.com/en-pt/professiona 
l/neurologic-disorders/movement-and-cerebellar-disorders/huntington-disease? 
query=huntington. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. (2010). Machado-Joseph Disease 
Fact Sheet. https://www.ninds.nih. 
gov/disorders/patient-caregiver-education/fact-sheets/machado-joseph 
-disease-fact-sheet#3163_3. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
National Multiple Sclerosis Society. (2020). About MS https://www.nationalmssociety. 
org/For-Professionals/Clinical-Care/About-MS. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Ng, S. K., Higashimori, H., Tolman, M., & Yang, Y. (2015). Suppression of adenosine 2a 
receptor (A2aR)-mediated adenosine signaling improves disease phenotypes in a 
mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Experimental Neurology, 267, 115–122. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.03.004 
O˜natibia-Astibia, A., Franco, R., & Martínez-Pinilla, E. (2017). Health benefits of 
methylxanthines in neurodegenerative diseases. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 
61, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201600670 
Pereira, G. V. M., Neto, D. P. C., Júnior, A. I. M., Prado, F. G., Pagnoncelli, M. G. B., 
Karp, S. G., et al. (2020). Chemical composition and health properties of coffee and 
coffee by-products. In F. Toldr´a (Ed.), Advances in food and nutrition research (pp. 
65–96). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
Pereira, G. V. M., Neto, D. P. C., Júnior, A. I. M., V´asquez, Z. S., Medeiros, A. B. P., 
Vandenberghe, L. P. S., et al. (2019). Exploring the impacts of postharvest processing 
on the aroma formation of coffee beans – a review. Food Chemistry, 272, 441–452. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.08.061 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Trends in Food Science & Technology 113 (2021) 167–179
179
P´erez-Burillo, S., Rajakaruna, S., Pastoriza, S., Paliy, O., & ´Angel Rufi´an-Henares, J. 
(2020). Bioactivity of food melanoidins is mediated by gut microbiota. Food 
Chemistry, 316(126309). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126309 
Poisson, L., Blank, I., Dunkel, A., & Hofmann, T. (2017). The chemistry of roasting – 
Decoding flavor formation. In B. Folmer (Ed.), The craft and science of coffee (pp. 
273–309). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
Potì, F., Santi, D., Spaggiari, G., Zimetti, F., & Zanotti, I. (2019). Polyphenol health 
effects on cardiovascular and neurodegenerative disorders: A review and meta- 
analysis. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(351). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijms20020351 
Preti, R. (2019). Progress in beverages authentication by the application of analytical 
techniques and chemometrics. In A. Grumezescu, & A. M. Holban (Eds.), Duxford 
Quality control in the beverage industry: Volume 17: The science of beverages. Woodhead 
Publishing.  
Prince, M., Guerchet, M., & Prina, M. (2015, March). The epidemiology and impact of 
dementia: Current state and future trends. Thematic briefing for the First WHO Ministerial 
Conference on the Global Action against Dementia (Geneva). 
Przedborski, S., Vila, M., & Jackson-Lewis, V. (2003). Neurodegeneration: What is it and 
where are we? The Journal of clinical investigation, 111, 3–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1172/JCI17522 
Qi, H., & Li, S. (2014). Dose-response meta-analysis on coffee, tea and caffeine 
consumption with risk of Parkinson’s disease. Geriatrics and Gerontology International, 
14, 430–439. https://doi.org/10.1111/ggi.12123 
Ritchie, K., Artero, S., Portet, F., Brickman, A., Muraskin, J., Beanino, E., et al. (2010). 
Caffeine, cognitive functioning, and white matter lesions in the elderly: Establishing 
causality from epidemiological evidence. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 1(20 Suppl), 
S161–S166. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2010-1387 
Rodrigues, N. P., & Bragagnolo, N. (2013). Identification and quantification of bioactive 
compounds in coffee brews by HPLC–DAD–MSn. Journal of Food Composition and 
Analysis, 32, 105–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfca.2013.09.002 
Sanlier, N., Atik, A., & Atik, I. (2019). Consumption of green coffee and the risk of 
chronic diseases. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 59, 2573–2585. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1461061 
Santos, M. D., Almeida, M. C., Lopes, N. P., & Souza, G. E. (2006). Evaluation of the anti- 
inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activities of the natural polyphenol 
chlorogenic acid. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 29, 2236–2240. https://doi. 
org/10.1248/bpb.29.2236 
Santos, C., Costa, J., Santos, J., Vaz-Carneiro, A., & Lunet, N. (2010a). Caffeine intake 
and dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 
20, S187–S204. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2010-091387 
Santos, C., Lunet, N., Azevedo, A., de Mendonça, A., Ritchie, K., & Barros, H. (2010b). 
Caffeine intake is associated with a lower risk of cognitive decline: A cohort study 
from Portugal. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 20(Suppl 1), S175–S185. https://doi. 
org/10.3233/JAD-2010-091303 
Sedaghat, G., Mirshekar, M. A., Amirpour, M., Montazerifar, F., Miri, S., & Shourestani, S. 
(2019). Sub-chronic administration of brewed coffee on rat behavior and cognition 
and oxidative stress Alzheimer’s disease model. Clinical Nutrition Experimental, 28, 
62–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yclnex.2019.10.005 
Simonin, C., Duru, C., Salleron, J., Hincker, P., Charles, P., Delval, A., et al. (2013). 
Association between caffeine intake and age at onset in Huntington’s disease. 
Neurobiology of Disease, 58, 179–182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.05.013 
Socała, K., Szopa, A., Serefko, A., Poleszak, E., & Wla´z, P. (2021). Neuroprotective effects 
of coffee bioactive compounds: A review. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
22(107). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22010107 
Speciale, S. G. (2002). MPTP: Insights into parkinsonian neurodegeneration. 
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 24, 607–620. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0892-0362 
(02)00222-2 
Tajik, N., Tajik, M., Mack, I., & Enck, P. (2017). The potential effects of chlorogenic acid, 
the main phenolic components in coffee, on health: a comprehensive review of the 
literature. European Journal of Nutrition, 56, 2215–2244. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00394-017-1379-1 
Travassos, M., Santana, I., Baldeiras, I., Tsolaki, M., Gkatzima, O., Sermin, G., et al. 
(2015). Does caffeine consumption modify cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β levels in 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease? Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 47, 1069–1078. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-150374 
Tsutsui, S., Schnermann, J., Noorbakhsh, F., Henry, S., Yong, V. W., Winston, B. W., et al. 
(2004). A1 adenosine receptor upregulation and activation attenuates 
neuroinflammation and demyelination in a model of multiple sclerosis. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 24, 1521–1529. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4271-03.2004 
Vann Jones, S. A., & O’Brien, J. T. (2014). The prevalence and incidence of dementia 
with Lewy bodies: A systematic review of population and clinical studies. 
Psychological Medicine, 44, 673–683. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291713000494 
Vignoli, J. A., Bassoli, D. G., & Benassi, M. T. (2011). Antioxidant activity, polyphenols, 
caffeine and melanoidins in soluble coffee: The influence of processing conditions 
and raw material. Food Chemistry, 124, 863–868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodchem.2010.07.008 
Vitaglione, P., Morisco, F., Mazzone, G., Amoruso, D. C., Ribecco, M. T., Romano, A., 
et al. (2010). Coffee reduces liver damage in a rat model of steatohepatitis: The 
underlying mechanisms and the role of polyphenols and melanoidins. Hepatology, 
52, 1652–1661. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.23902 
Wachamo, H. L. (2017). Review on health benefit and risk of coffee consumption. 
Medicinal & Aromatic Plants, 6(100301). https://doi.org/10.4172/2155- 
9821.1000301 
Wallin, M. T., Culpepper, W. J., Campbell, J. D., Nelson, L. M., Langer-Gould, A., 
Marrie, R. A., et al. (2019). The prevalence of MS in the United States: A population- 
based estimate using health claims data. Neurology, 92, 1029–1040. https://doi.org/ 
10.1212/WNL.0000000000007035 
Wang, H.-X., & Wang, Y.-P. (2016). Gut microbiota-brain axis. Chinese Medical Journal, 
129, 2373–2380. https://doi.org/10.4103/0366-6999.190667 
World Health Organization. (2013). Background Paper 6.11: Alzheimer Disease and 
other Dementias. https://www.who.int/medicines/areas/priority_medicines/BP6_ 
11Alzheimer.pdf. (Accessed 10 July 2020). 
Wu, L., Sun, D., & He, Y. (2017). Coffee intake and the incident risk of cognitive 
disorders: A dose-response meta-analysis of nine prospective cohort studies. Clinical 
Nutrition, 36, 730–736. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2016.05.015 
Xu, K., Xu, Y. H., Chen, J. F., & Schwarzschild, M. A. (2010). Neuroprotection by caffeine: 
Time course and role of its metabolites in the MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease. 
Neuroscience, 167, 475–481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.02.020 
Yamada-Fowler, N., Fredrikson, M., & S¨oderkvist, P. (2014). Caffeine interaction with 
glutamate receptor gene GRIN2A: Parkinson’s disease in Swedish population. PLoS 
One, 9, e99294. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0099294 
Yan, R., Zhang, J., Park, H. J., Park, E. S., Oh, S., Zheng, H., et al. (2018). Synergistic 
neuroprotection by coffee components eicosanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamide and caffeine 
in models of Parkinson’s disease and DLB. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 115, E12053–E12062. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.1813365115 
Zhao, L., Chen, J., Su, J., Li, L., Hu, S., Li, B., et al. (2013). In vitro antioxidant and 
antiproliferative activities of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 61, 10604–10611. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf403098y 
S.M. Carneiro et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
