Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/oncology-times by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3oaxD/vH2r76HRVHGVLRUvywgMDeVTyjarPFDZAP9p7A= on 01/17/2019
By Peggy Eastman
W
ASHINGTON, DC—Recent
studies from the American
Institute for Cancer Research
(AICR) and other groups
have highlighted the importance of
polyphenols, antioxidant compounds in
fruits, vegetables, and tea, in reducing
the risk of developing cancer. But,
while groups such as the National
Cancer Institute and the AICR have
consistently advised Americans to eat
more fruits and vegetables, Americans
actually get most of their antioxidants
from a surprising source: coffee. 
That finding comes from research
presented here at the American Chemi-
cal Society National Meeting by Joe A.
Vinson, PhD, Professor of Chemistry at
the University of Scranton (PA). 
“I found out to my amazement that
coffee was the number one source of
antioxidants” in the US diet, he said,
noting that both caffeinated and decaf-
feinated coffee brands seem to provide
the same levels of antioxidants. 
Dr. Vinson measured in milligrams
the top 10 sources of antioxidants con-
sumed on average in the US diet. Cof-
fee was far and away the number one
source at 1,299 mg per day. Black tea,
the second source, was not even close at
294 mg per day. 
Trailing tea in order of the amount
of antioxidants generally consumed
daily were bananas (76 mg), dry beans
(72 mg), corn (48 mg), red wine (44
mg), lager beer (42 mg), apples (39 mg),
tomatoes (32 mg), and potatoes (28 mg).
Dr. Vinson’s study was an in vitro
test, and he emphasized in an American
Chemical Society news briefing that
there are limitations to this kind of
study, including not knowing how
much of the antioxidant compounds are
actually being absorbed by the body. 
He also was quick to say that cof-
fee-loving Americans should not over-
do their coffee consumption in hopes of
loading up on antioxidants. One or two
cups of coffee a day are plenty, he said. 
He also urged more consumption
of tea for those who don’t like coffee,
along with a higher consumption of
fruits and vegetables for the general
population. Dr. Vinson noted that on
the basis of the amount of antioxidants
per serving size, dates, cranberries, and
red grapes are among the best fruits to
eat.
In a world with some 8,000 poly-
phenols, it is impossible to know just
what all of them do, Dr. Vinson said,
noting that these compounds are
designed to protect plants bombarded
by ultraviolet radiation and other
insults. 
“There are thousands of polyphe-
nols…we’ll never know them all. We
just don’t know all the good things that
come from these polyphenols yet. The
proof is in vivo.”
Other Research Highlights
Highlights of other cancer-related
research presented at the meeting fol-
low.
I A novel investigational com-
pound that interferes with the produc-
tion of gangliosides, molecules in the
membranes of most cells, could poten-
tially serve as an alternative to tradi-
tional cancer treatments such as chemo-
therapy and radiation or as a nontoxic
addition to these standard treatments,
reported Stephan Ladisch, MD, Direct-
or of the Center for Cancer and Im-
munology Research at the Children’s
Research Institute and Professor of
Pediatrics and Biochemistry/Molecular
Biology at George Washington Univer-
sity School of Medicine.
The synthesis and shedding of gan-
gliosides by tumor cells (which
produce gangliosides at a much
more rapid rate than normal cells
do) have been implicated in
immune function, angiogenesis,
and fibroblast proliferation. In
work with an experimental
mouse melanoma model, Dr.
Ladisch administered a carbohy-
drate compound, OGT2378,
which blocks the production of
an enzyme cancer cells require to
make gangliosides. 
The tumors in OGT2378-treated
mice were one-tenth the size of tumors
in untreated mice, said Dr. Ladisch,
who noted that with this approach—
unlike with toxic chemotherapy drugs—
the tumor’s own cellular mechanics are
being manipulated and changed to stop
its growth. 
I Benjamin Cravatt, PhD, Professor
in the Department of Cell Biology and
the Skaggs Institute for Chemical
Biology at the Scripps Research Insti-
tute, reported on his work with activi-
ty-based protein profiling, an emerging
proteomics technology that can detect
the human proteins associated with
breast cancer, including some not iden-
tified previously.
Dr. Cravatt combined activi-
ty-based protein profiling with
the proteomics method multidi-
mensional protein identification
technology (MudPIT), which
relies on mass spectrometry, to
analyze protein pools in more
detail. Dr. Cravatt said he hopes
that using these two methods
together could detect protein
markers of disease that evade detection
by other means.
I Karen J. Brewer, PhD, Associate
Professor of Inorganic Chemistry at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, presented research on the
assembly of manmade molecular com-
plexes that can enter cancer cells, and
when signaled to do so, can deliver
anti-cancer drugs or cause the cancer
cells to change. 
These new manmade “supermole-
cules” have many units that will absorb
light, and are used to deliver photody-
namic therapy. To their cancer-fighting
supermolecules Dr. Brewer and her
team have added platinum, which has
anti-cancer activity because it binds to
DNA and inhibits cell replication. 
The therapeutic supermolecule
complexes activate only with visible
light, so the researchers added a lumi-
nescent tag that glows in the presence
of ultraviolet light. Dr. Brewer noted
that since it is common practice in med-
icine to use luminescent dyes to study
cells, pathology laboratories have the
equipment needed to monitor cancer
drug delivery via the supermolecules.
I Researchers from Meiji Pharma-
ceutical University in Japan reported on
their work testing some 50 Japanese
mushrooms to find an inhibitor of tyro-
sine kinase, which plays a key role in
intracellular signaling and cancer pro-
liferation. The team has discovered that
a methanol extract from the fruiting
body of Polyozellus multiplex, the blue
chanterelle mushroom, inhibited the
activity of tyrosine kinase via the mole-
cule polyozellin. 
In a separate study on mushrooms,
Joy Dubost, a doctoral candidate in
food science at Pennsylvania State
University, found that cultivated mush-
rooms sold in US grocery stores are a
good natural source of the antioxidant
ergothioneine. She found that white
button mushrooms, the kind most com-
monly eaten in the United States, have
12 times more of the antioxidant than
wheat germ and four times more than
(continued on page 40)
American Chemical Society Annual Meeting
New Research on Antioxidants Shows 
Surprising Role for Coffee
PAGE 39 / OCTOBER 25, 2005
On the basis of the 
amount of antioxidants 
per serving size, dates,
cranberries, and red 
grapes are among the 
best fruits to eat.
there is a small increase in recurrence,
because the side effects of radiation
treatment for head and neck cancer are
so dramatic.
“Being able to save normal tissues
from horrible toxicity that makes some-
one unable to speak or swallow nor-
mally is paramount now that we’re
actually starting to cure patients,” he
said.” We may have to give up a couple
of percentage points of cure to make
life better for survivors.” 
OT
Antioxidants
continued from page 38
Joe A. Vinson, PhD: “I found to
my amazement that coffee was
the number one source of
antioxidants in the US diet,” and
both caffeinated and
decaffeinated coffee brands seem
to provide the same levels of
antioxidants.
Benjamin Cravatt, PhD, reported on
his work with activity-based protein
profiling, an emerging proteomics
technology that can detect the
human proteins associated with
breast cancer, including some not
identified previously. 

I Sorafenib Granted 
Priority Review for 
Advanced Kidney Cancer
Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) has been
granted priority review by the FDA for
patients with advanced renal cell can-
cer. 
The US submission was completed
in July and was based on an ongoing
Phase III trial, the results of which were
presented in May at the ASCO Annual
Meeting. 
Sorafenib is the first oral multiki-
nase inhibitor that targets serine/threo-
nine and receptor tyrosine kinases in
both the tumor cell and tumor vascula-
ture. In preclinical models, sorafenib
targeted two classes of kinases involved
in tumor cell proliferation and tumor
angiogenesis—RAF kinase, VEGFR-2,
VEGFR-3, PDGFR-ß, KIT, FLT-3, and
RET.
I Weight Loss Protects
Against Early Breast Cancer in
Women with BRCA Mutation
Weight loss during early adulthood
may protect against early-onset breast
cancer in carriers of the BRCA muta-
tion, according to a study in the Aug. 19
issue of Breast Cancer Research. 
The study is by far the largest to
investigate the link between anthropo-
metric measures and the risk of heredi-
tary breast cancer, noted the authors,
led by Joanne Kotsopoulos, a graduate
student at the Centre for Research in
Women’s Health, which is affiliated
with the University of Toronto and
with Sunnybrook and Women’s
College Health Sciences Centre. Senior
author was Steven A. Narod, MD. 
Earlier studies examining the rela-
tionship between early adult weight
gain and subsequent risk of breast can-
cer have yielded some conflicting
results, the team wrote. However, adult
weight gain seems to increase the risk
of postmenopausal breast cancer and
decrease the risk of premenopausal
breast cancer. 
The study’s finding of an effect of
weight loss in early years on early-
onset breast cancer is particularly sig-
nificant for the study population, since
BRCA-associated breast cancer usually
occurs at an early age, the authors
wrote. 
The case-control study included
1,073 pairs of women with a BRCA1
(797 pairs) or BRCA2 (276 pairs) muta-
tion from 41 participating centers in
five countries. 
Case subjects had been diagnosed
with invasive breast cancer, while con-
trol subjects had not, and the pairs were
matched by year of birth, mutation in
the same gene, country of residence,
and history of ovarian cancer. 
Weight loss of at least 10 pounds
between ages 18 and 30 was associated
with a 34% reduction in breast cancer
risk, but weight gain during the same
period did not increase the overall risk. 
However, in the subgroup of
women with a BRCA1 mutation who
had had at least two full-term pregnan-
cies, weight gain of more than 10
pounds between the ages of 18 and 30
was associated with a 44% increase in
breast cancer risk. 
Changes in body weight were
found to have different effects depend-
ing on whether breast cancer was diag-
nosed before or after age 40. Loss of at
least 10 pounds was linked to a signifi-
cantly lowered risk of breast cancer
diagnosed between the ages of 30 and
40 (OR 0.47) but not of breast cancer
diagnosed after age 40.
In addition, while subgroup analy-
ses showed that weight loss of at least
10 pounds in women with a BRCA1
mutation was linked to a 65% reduction
in cancer risk compared with women in
the reference group, weight loss in
women with the BRCA2 mutation was
associated with only a modest protec-
tive effect, which did not reach statisti-
cal significance. 
Changes in body weight later in
life, between the ages of 30 and 40, did
not influence the risk of premenopausal
or postmenopausal breast cancer. 
The study shows that early diet
and weight controls can affect cancer
risk many years later, Dr. Narod wrote
in an e-mail message, adding that the
results warrant further studies in diet
and exercise and studies that look at the
biological basis for weight loss as pro-
tective against breast cancer. 
I AJCC/UICC TNM Inviting
Proposals for Staging
Algorithms
The American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC)/International Union
Against Cancer (UICC) is inviting pro-
posals to develop and evaluate im-
proved staging algorithms for specific
cancer sites and types.
Applicants may use elements cur-
rently used for AJCC/UICC Tumor-
Nodes-Metastases (TNM) staging,
additional or modified anatomic and
non-anatomic factors to define progno-
sis, and incorporate validated factors
that identify response to treatment. 
The organization notes that appli-
cations that address and validate the
use of non-anatomic factors to improve
the utility of staging and define
response to therapy are encouraged.
The results will be used by the
AJCC Disease Site Task Forces that will
recommend revision of the seventh edi-
tion of the AJCC Cancer Staging
Manual, due for publication in 2009.
Letters of intent are due by
December 15 of this year, and formal
applications must be received by
January 16. Further information is
available by sending a request to
ajcc@facs.org.
I Positive Pain Expectations
Lower Perceived Pain, Study
Finds 
Positive expectations diminished the
subjective experience of pain and pain-
related brain activation, offering some
proof for the power of positive think-
ing, according to a study published in
the September 6 issue of the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The conclusions of this study, led
by Tetsuo Koyama, MD, PhD, a post-
doctoral fellow at Wake Forest Uni-
versity Baptist Medical Center, provide
a neural mechanism that could partly
explain the positive effects of optimism
on chronic disease and underscore the
potential of cognitive therapy for pain
treatment, the authors wrote. 
“We did find a very sizeable effect
(continued on page 43)
PAGE 40 / OCTOBER 25, 2005
Weight loss of at least 
10 pounds between ages 
18 and 30 was associated
with a 34% reduction in
breast cancer risk, but
weight gain during the
same period did not 
increase breast cancer risk.
C L I N I C A L  N O T E S
chicken liver—previously the top-rated
sources of ergothioneine. 
I In other research from Penn
State, Michael Pishko, PhD, Professor of
Chemical Engineering and Materials
Science and Engineering, and his col-
leagues reported on research that
encases a chemotherapy drug in a poly-
mer nanoshell so it will circulate longer
in vascularized areas such as cancerous
tumors. The scientists first make nano-
sized powders of the drug they wish to
deliver—in this case paclitaxel—and
encase it in the polymeric nanoshell. 
The polymer shell allows the drug
to travel through the bloodstream like a
“stealth missile” (with less toxicity to
normal tissues) to its intended cancer-
ous target. The nanoshell has a tentacle-
like projection that targets a receptor on
a tumor cell; once the encapsulated
drug hits its target, it attaches to the tar-
get and releases its cancer-fighting con-
tents. 
Dr. Pishko said he hopes this drug
delivery method might eventually have
application to gene therapy as well as
cancer treatment. It is not feasible for
brain cancers because of the blood-
brain barrier.
I At a symposium on tobacco car-
cinogenesis, Trevor M. Penning, PhD,
Professor of Pharmacology and princi-
pal investigator of a program project on
carcinogenesis at the University of
Pennsylvania (and a co-organizer of the
symposium) reported on the means by
which polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons from smoking tobacco may form
lesions in DNA, which can trigger gene
mutations that allow cancer cells to
emerge and grow without being con-
trolled. 
Mimi C. Yu, PhD, Professor of Re-
search in the Department of Preventive
Medicine at the University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine in
Los Angeles, reported on 4-amino-
biphenyl (4-ABP), a compound present
in tobacco smoke, a known human
bladder carcinogen. She presented data
showing that being female produces a
higher risk of bladder cancer in tobacco
smokers. 
Symposium co-organizer Stephen
S. Hecht, PhD, Head of Cancer Preven-
tion at the University of Minnesota
Cancer Center, said that understanding
the mechanisms by which tobacco
products cause cancer can help shed
new light on controlling tobacco use,
predicting individual susceptibility to
cancer from use of tobacco, and pre-
venting cancer in general.
OT
Antioxidants
continued from page 39
“There are thousands of
polyphenols…we’ll never
know them all. We just
don’t know all the good
things that come from 
these polyphenols yet. 
The proof is in vivo.” 
