Achieving sustainable 
cultivation of coffee
Breeding and quality traits
Edited by Dr Philippe Lashermes
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), France
BURLEIGH DODDS SERIES IN AGRICULTURAL SCIENCE
E-CHAPTER FROM THIS BOOK

http://dx.doi.org/10.19103/AS.2017.0022.14
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Chapter taken from: Lashermes, P. (ed.), Achieving sustainable cultivation of coffee, Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing, 
Cambridge, UK, 2018 (ISBN: 978 1 78676 152 1; www.bdspublishing.com)
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
Adriana Farah, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
	
1	 Introduction
	
2	 Nutrients and bioactive compounds of coffee
	
3	 Main beneficial health effects of coffee
	
4	 Potential side effects of coffee drinking
	
5	 Final considerations
	
6	 Acknowledgements
	
7	 Where to look for further information
	
8	 References
1  Introduction
Good health and well-being are essential for all humans and depend upon good nutrition. 
Only when an individual has good health can he or she fully utilize their physical and 
mental potentials.
Since the beginning of humanity, plant foods have been used to promote health and 
prevent disease. Coffee has been exalted by people of different nations and times not 
only because of its distinctive aroma and taste but also due to its stimulating and health-
promoting effects (Bizzo et al., 2015).
The earliest potential references to coffee consumption are found in the Old Testament, 
where a bean was referred to as a ‘parched pulse’, and the first written mention of coffee is 
attributed to Razes, a tenth-century Arabian physician, who indicated that coffee cultivation 
may have begun as early as 575 AD (Smith, 1987; Folmer et al., 2017). However, the first 
written documentation of the medicinal properties and uses of coffee was reported by 
the Middle Eastern physician, Avicenna (980–1037 AD), who used it as a decongestant, 
muscle relaxant and diuretic infusion. It is said that in the thirteenth century, a doctor-priest 
from Mocha, Sheikh Omar, also discovered coffee in Arabia and used it as a cure for many 
different types of illnesses (Ukers, 1935). The earliest coffee houses opened in Mecca 
in the fifteenth century, but were primarily reserved for religious purposes. After they 
were popularized, following a trip to Aleppo, Dr. Leonard Rauwolf, a German physician, 
introduced the beverage to Western Europe in the sixteenth century and referred to it as 
being ‘almost as black as ink and very good in illness, chiefly that of the stomach’ (Ukers, 
1935; Folmer et al., 2017).

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
2
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Neither the Greek physician Hippocrates (460–377AD) nor the Roman physician Aelius 
Galenus (129–199 AD), who later expanded Galenic theories, ever mentioned coffee, as 
it was not consumed in their region at that time. However, the followers of Hippocratic–
Galenic medicine, which dominated physiology from the fourth century BC to the 
nineteenth century, used it to balance the body’s ‘humours’ in accordance with individual 
temperaments. Coffee was considered to be beneficial to people with a lymphatic or 
bilious temperament, whereas sanguine or nervous subjects were advised to use it more 
reservedly. Consequently, coffee houses, which were first introduced in Europe in the 
seventeenth century, were often recommended for those suffering from maladies as part 
of their treatment (Bizzo et al., 2015). In the eighteenth century, they also became places 
for social gathering and commerce, and over time, more coffee houses opened up and 
became popular (Folmer et al., 2017).
Despite its recognition as a medicinal agent or simply a beverage with an attractive taste, 
throughout history, coffee has occasionally been seen as a villain, and to date, remainders of 
this reputation still exist. The perception of coffee as an intoxicating drug and the sensitivity 
of some people to caffeine are the main reasons for this, along with past discussions on 
its potential contribution to the development of cancer or other diseases. However, over 
the last few decades, the appearance of modern scientific technology, in combination 
with large and reliable databases and sophisticated statistics, has enabled the separation 
of confounding factors in epidemiological studies such as existing medical conditions, 
smoking or a poor-quality diet. Additionally, an increasing number of studies have proved 
that despite its nutritional limitations, coffee is a complex mixture of bioactive substances 
that may act together to help prevent diseases when consumed appropriately. In view of 
this, our understanding of coffee and its healthful properties has changed dramatically. 
Currently, the general opinion is that moderate coffee consumption is not associated with 
increased long-term risks amongst healthy individuals and can be incorporated into a 
healthy and diverse diet, in combination with other healthful behaviours (US Department 
of Agriculture – USDA, 2015).
This chapter presents a brief literature review of the nutritional and main health-related 
aspects of regular coffee consumption.
2  Nutrients and bioactive compounds of coffee 
The chemical composition of roasted coffee beans has been detailed in previous 
chapters. In summary, they contain approximately 43% carbohydrates (of which 70–85% is 
comprised of polysaccharides, arabinogalactans, mannans and glucan, and the remaining 
amount includes sucrose, reducing sugars, lignins and pectins); 7.5–10% proteins; other 
nitrogenous compounds (1% caffeine, 0.7–1% trigonelline and 0.01–0.04% nicotinic acid); 
10–15% lipids (of which approximately 75% correspond to triacylglycerols, 18.5% to esters 
of diterpens and free diterpens and the remaining amount to esters of sterols, free sterols, 
sterylglucosides, waxes, tocopherols and phosphatides); 25% melanoidins, 3.7–5% 
minerals and ~6% organic and inorganic acids, and esters (1–4% chlorogenic acids and 
other phenolic compounds, 1.4–2.5% aliphatic acids and quinic acid and <0.3% inorganic 
acids), in addition to other minor compounds that may be exclusive to a particular species 

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
3
(Farah, 2012; Speer and Kölling-Speer, 2017). In this chapter, we will focus on the most 
common species found around the world, Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora, which 
are also the most consumed and the only species studied with respect to human health.
The coffee beverage or brew is an aqueous extract derived from the infusion or 
percolation of roasted and ground coffee beans, using hot or cold water. The reported 
amounts of nutrients, main bioactive compounds and other non-nutrients in coffee 
brews are presented in Table 1. It is worth noting that a coffee brew exhibits very high 
variability in terms of chemical composition due to many possible variations in raw 
material production, processing and brewing, which lead to the final product (the brew). 
The first variable is the blend, which can contain different percentages of coffee beans, 
each with distinct chemical compositions derived from genetic aspects, origin and degree 
of maturation (the latter being considered only in the case of a lower quality blend), grown 
under different conditions and processed via varying postharvest methods. There are 
also many existing types of roasting profiles and roasting degrees. The roasted beans 
can then be ground to different sizes and the proportion of powder to water classically 
used can change dramatically between countries and cultures. For example, whilst in 
most European countries, the use of 6 g per 100 mL is common for filtered coffees, in 
Brazil, 10 g or more is used. In Italy, 20 g of ground roasted coffee is also not uncommon 
for 100  mL. In espresso coffee, although traditionally 6–8  g is used per 25  mL water, 
an extreme proportion of 10 g per 25 mL water is nowadays often used by third-wave 
baristas. In addition, there are a variety of brewing methods where pressure, temperature 
and contact time between the water and the ground coffee vary, and therefore require 
different amounts of powder. Some methods use filters made up of different materials, 
which may also influence the composition of the final brew. On top of all this, the size of 
a cup can vary from about 25 mL for an Italian espresso to 600 mL (20 oz) in the United 
States. The standard American cup, however, is often reported as being equivalent to 
approximately 250 mL (8 fluid oz). The traditional European filter cup has been defined 
in different studies, including that of Floegel et al. (2012), as containing 150 mL. Finally, 
analytical methods may cause differences in the reported compositional results, especially 
for the least sensitive and specific methods. Thus, it is understandable that there are no 
rigorous standard values that represent the chemical composition of a cup of coffee, but 
rather a range of values. Table 1, therefore, reports the ranges of values found in the 
literature, but higher or lower values can be found, depending on the compound.
It is worth noting that the yield of a brew (i.e. the amount of solids extracted from the 
ground coffee found in a cup) may vary from as low as 14% to as much as 60% during 
soluble coffee production, thus affecting the composition of the brew. Further to this, the 
extractability of a compound by water will also depend on the amount of soluble solids 
in the water. Water, containing a high amount of minerals like calcium, magnesium and 
chloride may extract less solids from the ground coffee, and may also influence the flow 
time in an espresso machine (Folmer, pers. comm.). Considering that up to 40 g of coffee 
could be used to prepare 100 mL of a coffee beverage, the amount of soluble solids in 
coffee brews has been reported to vary from 2 to 6 g per 100 mL cup (Pettraco, 2005) (also 
referred to as a TC ranging from 2 to 6%). In the traditionally weaker American coffees, 
measurements of the amount of solids in a few cups yielded 1.2–1.5 g per 100 g. It is worth 
highlighting that the amount of solids depends upon the degree of roasting.
The main components of the brew are now briefly described.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
4
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Table 1 Content range of nutrients, bioactive compounds and other non-nutrients in coffee brews 
obtained from ground and roasted blends of C. arabica species or blends of C. arabica and C. canephora 
species (Trugo, 1985; Macrae, 1985; Clifford, 1985; Urgent et al., 1995; Nunes et al., 1997; Balzer, 2001; 
Alcázar et al., 2003; Petracco, 2005; Boekschoten et al., 2006; Lang et al., 2010,2011; Farah, 2012; Rubach 
et al., 2014; Lachenmeier, 2015; USDA, 2017; Glória and Engeseth, 2017)
Nutrients and non-nutrients
Content rangea 
(from blends of C. arabica or C. arabica and C. canephora sp.)
Macronutrients
mg per 100 mL
Water
94 000–98 500 (TC 1.5–6%)
Simple sugarsb
0–100 (one report up to 200 mg)
Proteins
120–400
Lipids
180–400
Soluble fibresc
200–700 (more commonly between 400 and 500)
Aliphatic acids and quinic acidf
692–2140
Vitamins:
Thiamin (B1)
0.001
Riboflavin (B2)
0.177
Niacin (B3, nicotinic acid)d
0.8–10 (more commonly up to 5)
Pyridoxine (B6)
0.002
Folate (B9, DFE)e
1
Vitamin C, total ascorbic acid
0.2
Vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol)
0.01
Vitamin K (phylloquinone)
0.1
Tocopherols (α, β, γ)
Traces, only in unfiltered coffees
Minerals: Total ashes
150–500
Potassium, K
115–320
Calcium, Ca
2–4
Sodium, Na
1–14
Phosphorus, P
3–7
Iron, Fe
0.02–0.13
Zinc, Zn
0.01–0.05
Manganese, Mn
0.02–0.05
Bioactive compounds
mg per 100 mL
Caffeine
50–380 (commonly between 50 and 150)
Trigonelline
12–50 
N-methylpyridinium
2.9–8.7
Diterpenes (cafestol and kahweol)
0.2–1.5 (paper filtered); 2.6–10 (boiled) 
Chlorogenic acids
32–500 (commonly 50–150)

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
5
2.1  Macronutrients
As with other types of plant beverages, coffee brews do not contain excessive amounts of 
macronutrients (absorbable carbohydrates, proteins and lipids) and calories, unless they are 
consumed with sugar, milk or cream. According to the USDA National Nutrient Database 
(2017), 100 mL of filtered coffee (breakfast blend) contains approximately 2 kcal. Exceptions 
include boiled coffees and similar types of brews, which contain a reasonable amount of 
lipids as both soluble and insoluble materials are consumed. The nutritional quality of coffee 
proteins is limited and approximately 50% of this fraction is insoluble and lacks the essential 
amino acid, tryptophan (Macrae, 1985). In addition, during roasting, most simple sugars and 
proteins are degraded or changed via the Maillard and pyrolysis reactions and so the amount 
of protein in the cup is low (120–400 mg per 100 mL, USDA 2017). The detection of up to 
200 mg per 100 mL of simple sugars, mainly arabinose, galactose and mannose, and lower 
amounts of sucrose, fructose and glucose, has been reported for brewed coffee and dissolved 
soluble coffee at 2% (coffee/water), with the latter being higher (Macrae, 1985; Trugo, 1985). 
Galactomannans and type 2 arabinogalactans are considered to be the predominant soluble 
dietary fibres in a coffee beverage (often between 140 and 650 mg per 100 mL), of which 
approximately 70% is comprised of galactomannans (Gniechwitz et al., 2007; Farah, 2012); 
however, care is needed to distinguish polysaccharides from total carbohydrates in order to 
avoid overestimation.
Nutrients and non-nutrients
Content rangea 
(from blends of C. arabica or C. arabica and C. canephora sp.)
Sum of other phenolic 
compounds
0.1–0.2
Melanoidins
500–1500 
β-carbolins (norharman and 
harman)
0.004–0.08
Serotonin
0–1.4
Melatonin
0.006–0.008
Polyamines (spermine and 
spermidine)
0.4
Some undesirable compoundsg
µg per 100 mL
Acrylamide
3.9–7.7 
5-hydroxytryptamidesh
1.2–34.3 (filtered), 350–840 (espresso and French press)
Furani
3.8–262
a  Content varies with blend, origin, agricultural practices, roasting method and degree, grid, brewing method, 
amount of coffee powder to water and analytical method.
b Arabinose, mannose, galactose, sucrose and minor monosaccharides.
c Polysaccharides, mainly galactomannans and type II arabinogalactans.
d Daily recommendations for adults:16 mg for men and 14 mg for women (WHO/FAO, 2002).
e Dietary Folate Equivalent.
f pH 4.3 (acidic coffee, light roast), to 5.8. Common values around 5.0.
g These undesirable compounds do not include incidental contaminants.
h N-alkanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamides (C5HTs).
i Content decreases rapidly after brew preparation.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
6
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
2.2  Micronutrients
With regards to micronutrients, the brew may contain a reasonable amount of vitamins and 
minerals. Niacin, in the form of nicotinic acid, is the main vitamin in a coffee brew and is 
also known as vitamin B3 or PP (pellagra preventing), and participates as a coenzyme in 
various metabolic processes involved in energy metabolism and tissue health. Additionally, 
it contributes to the normal functioning of the nervous system, among many other functions. 
Deficiency of this vitamin causes pellagra, a disease characterized by skin lesions and 
diarrhea, among other symptoms (Arauz et al., 2015). Regular coffee consumption can supply 
an essential part of the daily recommendation for adults, which is 16 mg for men and 14 mg 
for women according to FAO standards (WHO/FAO, 2002). Niacin can also be produced 
in the liver from a reasonable amount of tryptophan (60mg thyptophan makes 1mg niacin), 
which is present in animal proteins, nuts, and some other seeds. The intake of niacin from 
coffee is particularly important in places where tryptophan consumption is low, such as in the 
rural and less developed areas of Central America and Central Africa where corn (which is 
poor in niacin and tryptophan) is the staple food (Carpenter, 1983; Macrae, 1985). However, 
it is worth noting that people who consume corn as tortillas or similar foods made with corn 
flour pre-treated with alkaline water are not at risk of niacin deficiency as those who consume 
untreated corn and corn flour (Carpenter, 1983). Most recently, supplementation of nicotinic 
acid has been used to decrease low and very low density lipoproteins (LDL and VLDL) levels 
(Le Bloch et al., 2010) and to contribute to the hepatoprotective effect of coffee (Arauz et al., 
2015) and therefore, an additional food source of niacin, like coffee is welcome considering 
that excess amounts of the vitamin are excreted in urine (Wang et al, 2001).
Coffee brews may also contain very small amounts of nicotinamide, another form of niacin, 
and other B vitamins (thiamin, riboflavin, pyridoxine, folic acid), ascorbic acid (vitamin C), and 
phylloquinone (vitamin K) (Macrae, 1985; USDA 2017). Unfiltered coffees can contain small 
residual amounts of tocophenols (α, β and γ – the latter two predominate), although during 
and after roasting almost all of the original amount in green coffee (about 60 mg/100g) is 
degraded or oxidized (Macrae, 1985).
Considering the different factors that create a large variability in the composition of 
roasted coffee, in addition to differing brewing methods and the extractability of different 
minerals, the values of total ash ranging between 150 and 500 mg per 100 mL have been 
reported, including data from dissolved soluble coffee (containing 7–10% ash), prepared 
at 2% (ground coffee to water). For infusions prepared from ground coffee in Poland 
(Grembecka et al., 2007), the consumption of 300 mL (2 cups) was estimated to supply, 
on average, 4.5% of the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for Mg, 3.5% for K, 2.8% 
for Mn, 2.4% for Cr, 1.9% for P, 0.32–0.43% for Ca and Na, 0.26–0.33% for Cu and Fe, 
0.13% for Zn and 2.6–15.6% for Ni. Higher average percentages were estimated from the 
ingestion of a 300-mL beverage prepared from instant coffee: 12.3% for Mg, 8.9% for K, 
8.6% for Mn, 4.9% for Cr, 7.4% for P, 1.6% for Ca, 2.5% for Na, 0.32% for Cu, 2.9% for Fe, 
0.35% for Zn and 4.9–29.7% for Ni. Estimates indicate that the consumption of coffee in 
typical amounts does not exceed the tolerance limits for the ingestion of toxic metals, such 
as Pb and Cd.
In a study performed in Portugal (Oliveira et al., 2012), two cups of instant coffee (total of 
4 g) were estimated to supply 9.5% of the RDA for K, 5.2% for Mg, 4.4% for Mn, 3.5% for 
Ni, 2.2% for P, 1.5% for Fe, 0.5% for Cr, 0.4% for Ca and 0.2% for Na. In a more recent study, 
also performed in Portugal (Oliveira et al., 2015), one cup of an espresso coffee beverage 
(prepared from 5 to 6 g of ground coffee) was estimated to provide 5.2–7.0% of the RDA for 

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
7
K, 2.8–7.2% for P, 1.4–2.2% for Mg, 1.4–1.9% for Mn, 0.14–0.28% for Ca, 0.07–0.15% for Fe 
and <0.02% for Na.
Other similar studies indicate that regular coffee intake (300 mL) does not contribute, 
in most cases, to amounts higher than 10% of the daily recommendations in different 
countries.
2.3  Bioactive compounds
It is well known that nutrients are required to maintain normal body functions and are 
therefore bioactive. However, the term ‘bioactive compounds’ commonly refers to minor 
food constituents that exert biological functions other than nutritional functions. These 
compounds are commonly found in plants, and in a few animals that feed on them, and 
their chemical structures and biological functions vary widely.
Although most health-related aspects of coffee have been attributed to the beverage 
and not to individual compounds, mechanistic studies have suggested that some specific 
bioactive compounds play key roles as co-adjuvant agents in disease prevention. In 
addition to caffeine, the most studied bioactive compounds of coffee are chlorogenic acids 
and their lactones, trigonelline and their derivatives, the diterpenes, cafestol and kahweol 
and melanoidins. The polysaccharides, galactomannans and type II arabinogalactans, 
and β-carbolines are amongst the emerging bioactive compounds for which there is still 
insufficient information to substantiate any health effects. Also, relatively recently, it has 
been suggested that some coffee amines exert positive effects on health when consumed 
in low quantities, which are referred to as bioactive amines. Each of these compounds or 
group of compounds will be introduced hereafter and their effect on health will be briefly 
discussed. The main undesirable compounds in coffee are also introduced.
2.3.1  Caffeine
Caffeine is the most well-studied compound present in coffee, and its mechanisms of 
function are generally well documented. First, there are psychostimulating effects which 
include an acute impact on mental performance as well as long-term influence on the risk 
of developing neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. Caffeine 
has also been found to improve physical performance, which will be discussed in the next 
section on the health effects of coffee. Most recently, a number of studies have reported 
new bioactive effects for caffeine, and one of the emerging effects is the enhancement 
of the antioxidant effect of coffee. Caffeine metabolites, especially 1-methylxantine and 
1-methylurate, have exhibited an antioxidant activity in vitro (Moura-Nunes et al., 2009). 
Corroborating these results, the average plasma iron-reducing capacity of human subjects 
after regular coffee consumption was higher than that recorded after the consumption of 
decaffeinated coffee, suggesting that whole coffee is more efficient than decaffeinated 
coffee with respect to its antioxidant capacity (Moura-Nunes et al., 2009).
There are a few in vitro studies showing that caffeine contributes to the antibacterial effect 
of coffee against Streptococcus mutans, a significant contributor to cariogenic bacteria, as 
well as intestinal pathogenic bacteria (Antonio et al., 2010). Over the last few years, it has 
also been suggested that caffeine exerts an antihyperlipidemic effect (decreased storage 
of triglycerides and cholesterol) by inhibiting lipogenesis and stimulating lipolysis through 
the regulation of the gene expression responsible for lipid metabolism in liver cells (Quan, 
2013). These are just a few of the various emerging effects of caffeine.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
8
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
2.3.2  Chlorogenic acids and their derivatives
Chlorogenic acids and their derivatives – Chlorogenic acids are the main phenolic compounds 
in coffee and this group of compounds includes approximately ten major esters and four 
major lactones (produced during roasting), in addition to dozens of trace compounds. The 
total amount of chlorogenic acids in C. canephora beans is almost double than that found 
in C. arabica beans, and because chlorogenic acids are partly degraded or transformed 
during roasting, dark roasted coffees contain lower amounts of these compounds. In roasted 
products, the difference between species is significantly reduced.
These compounds are frequently referred to as powerful antioxidants and anti-
inflammatory compounds due to the results of in vitro and animal studies, as well as a 
few human studies (Santos et al., 2006; Torres and Farah; 2016, Folmer et al., 2017), but 
the mechanism of action of the different compounds and how they are related to the 
prevention of the disease remains, to a large extent, unknown.
Owing to the high concentration of chlorogenic acids in coffee brews (Table 1), 
compared with chlorogenic acids and other phenolic compounds in foods, in general, they 
may play a major role in the diet of consumers as a source of antioxidative compounds. 
The significant contribution of chlorogenic acids to the dietary intake of antioxidative 
compounds is exemplified in a number of reports from different countries in which, based 
on their official food consumption database or other types of surveys, coffee was the main 
contributor to total dietary antioxidant capacity, that is, Brazil (66%), Norway (64%), Italy 
(38% for women and 27% for men), Spain (45%), Japan (56%) and the Czech Republic 
(54.6% for women and 43.1% for men) (Torres and Farah, 2016). However, it should be 
kept in mind that the intake of chlorogenic acids from coffee does not replace the intake 
of antioxidants from other foods, as each has its own specific bioactivity.
Together with other polyphenols, carotenoids and additional classes of antioxidative 
compounds, chlorogenic acids and their lactones have been associated with a decrease in 
the risk of Alzheimer’s and type 2 diabetes, amongst various degenerative diseases (Kasai 
et al., 2000; Obuleso et al., 2011; Farah, 2012).
Long before epidemiological studies investigated the association between coffee 
consumption and health effects, the antimutagenic property of chlorogenic acids and their 
metabolites was discovered. Recent studies have confirmed these findings and elucidated 
several mechanisms of chemopreventive action, which include modulating the expression 
of the enzymes that are involved in endogenous antioxidant defences, DNA replication, 
cell differentiation and ageing (Feng et al., 2005; Ramos, 2008;Jurkowska, 2011), metal 
chelation, inactivation of reactive compounds and metabolic pathway changes (Kasai et 
al., 2000; Farah, 2012). In the colon, for example, chlorogenic acids may inactivate free 
reactive radicals and as a result help prevent colon cancer (Ludwig et al., 2014).
Additional health effects observed in vitro and in animal studies include hepatoprotective 
(including cirrhosis, liver cancer and other liver diseases), immune-stimulatory and 
antibacterial and antiviral activities. Synthetic derivatives of these compounds have also 
inhibited HIV-1 replication in cells, which could play a role in research towards drugs 
that inhibit HIV (Farah, 2012). Additionally, recent in vitro studies have suggested that 
after coffee consumption, the unabsorbed portion of chlorogenic acids may serve as a 
substrate to stimulate the growth of beneficial intestinal bacteria; however, this effect 
requires further investigation due to conflicting data in different studies (Sales et al., 2017).
Trace amounts of other phenolic compounds, that is, isoflavones, proantocyanidins 
and lignans, have been identified in coffee (Farah and Donangelo, 2006), which possibly 
enhance the beneficial effects of chlorogenic acids.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
9
2.3.3  Melanoidins and polysaccharides
Melanoidins and polysaccharides – Coffee melanoidins have gained importance over the 
years because of their contribution to, amongst others, the antioxidant and antimicrobial 
effects of coffee (Rufián-Henares and Morales, 2007). This is at least, in part, due to the 
incorporation of chlorogenic acids and other bioactive compounds into their structure 
during roasting (Farah, 2012).
As melanoidins are not digested, they may act, in combination with coffee polysaccharides 
(mainly galactomannans and type II arabinogalactans), as soluble dietary fibres. They are 
largely indigestible and thus fermented in the gut (Borrelli et al., 2004; Gniechwitz, 2008). 
A recent study concluded that the consumption of 0.5–2 g melanoidins per day (present 
in 2–5 cups) contributes up to 20% of the recommended 10 g of daily soluble dietary fibre 
intake. It has also been hypothesized that these substances may stimulate the growth of 
beneficial bacteria in the lower digestive tract (Fogliano and Morales, 2011), in the same 
way as chlorogenic acids; however, the data remain controversial.
As with chlorogenic acids (Passos et al., 2014), it has been hypothesized that melanoidins 
can enhance immune-stimulating properties and contribute significantly to reducing the risk 
of colon cancer (Vitaglione et al., 2012; Moreira et al., 2015; Fogliano and Morales, 2011), 
which might occur in different ways: i) by increasing the elimination rate of carcinogens 
through higher colon motility and faecal output, ii) by decreasing colon inflammation 
through improved microbiota balance (prebiotic effect) and iii) by serving as a ‘sponge’ for 
free radicals in the gut (Garsetti et al., 2000; Folmer et al., 2017).
2.3.4  Trigonelline and derivatives
Trigonelline and derivatives – Trigonelline is another compound that has gained importance 
in recent years due to its potential contribution to the protective effect of coffee against 
diseases. In vitro and animal studies have reported different involvements of trigonelline 
against type 2 diabetes (Yoshinari and Igarashi, 2010), as well as neuroprotective (Hong et al., 
2008; Tohda et al., 2005), antitumour (Hirakawa et al., 2005) and phytoestrogenic effects 
(Farah, 2012). Beans from C. arabica species contain higher amounts of this compound, 
compared with C. canephora, and as with chlorogenic acids, trigonelline undergoes changes 
and degradation during roasting; hence, dark roasted coffees contain low amounts. However, 
10–20% of the original amount of trigonelline is converted into nicotinic acid (niacin) (Farah, 
2012). In addition to its vitamin function, niacin is also involved in other bioactive functions, 
presenting antidiabetic (Yoshinari and Igarashi, 2010), antioxidant and hepatoprotective (Arauz 
et al., 2015) effects in vitro and in animal studies. The compound n-methylpyridinium and 
other pyridinium derivatives are additional thermal degradation products generated by the 
decarboxylation of trigonelline. It has been reported that like trigonelline, n-methylpyridinium 
promoted higher glucose utilization in liver cells, stimulating cellular energy metabolism and 
contributing to the protective effect against type 2 diabetes (Riedel et al., 2014). Pyridinium 
derivatives have also been reported to present antioxidant/chemopreventive (Somoza et 
al., 2003), hepatoprotective (Gebicki et  al., 2008), vasoprotective (Lang et al., 2011) and 
antithrombotic effects (Kalaska et al., 2014).
2.3.5  Diterpenes
Diterpenes – Cafestol and kahweol are diterpenes present in coffee mainly in the form of 
salts or esters of (predominantly) saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. They represent 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
10
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
approximately 20% of the lipid fraction of coffee, with cafestol being more abundant. Higher 
levels of diterpenes are found in C. arabica than in C. canephora species. Coffee diterpenes 
exhibit strong anticarcinogenic and hepatoprotective properties in vitro (Farah, 2012).
Diterpene levels in the coffee cup vary significantly based on the natural variations in 
green coffee beans, roasting conditions and preparation methods (Urgert et al., 1997; Gross, 
1997;Urgert and Katan, 1995). Whilst filtered and soluble coffees are practically diterpene-
free (due to their poor solubility in water, they are trapped by paper filters), espresso-based 
methods contain higher levels of diterpenes, which are, on the other hand, significantly 
lower than those found in French press or Turkish coffee (2–10 mg per cup) (Farah, 2012).
2.3.6  β-carbolines
β-carbolines – These are alkaloids formed in coffee mainly during roasting and the 
two identified β-carbolines in coffee are norharman and harman. Despite some past 
controversies regarding the neurological and toxicological effects of these compounds 
in studies using high doses in animals, β-carbolines have been recently associated 
with potentially positive effects, including neurological ones, with antidepressive and 
neuroprotective properties. It has also been suggested that they may reduce the risk of 
diabetes. The total concentration of these compounds in the brew is highly variable in the 
literature, from 4 to 80 µg per 100 mL, but typical concentrations are reported to be in the 
range of 4–20 µg per 100 mL, being primarily dependent on the coffee species. Roasted 
C. canephora beans have consistently higher amounts of β-carbolines than C. arabica 
beans (Farah, 2012;Rodrigues and Casal, 2017;Casal, 2017).
2.3.7  Bioactive amines
Bioactive amines – These compounds are organic bases with psychoactive, neuroactive or 
vasoactive activity and participate in a number of processes in the human body. Coffee amines 
that present positive health effects in in vitro and in animal studies, other than their known 
physiological effects in the body, are called bioactive amines. However, no direct association 
between their presence in coffee and benefits to human health has been found. The main 
bioactive amines are the indolamines, serotonine and melatonin, and the polyamines, 
spermine and spermidine. Mean reported concentrations of serotonin in coffee beverages 
vary from non-detected to 90 µg per 100 mL in most coffee beverages, but from 372 to 
1354 µg per 100 mL in Turkish coffee. Information regarding melatonin is rare; however, 
levels ranging from 6 to about 8 µg per 100 mL have been found. Although serotonin is 
a neuroactive substance with various positive effects on well-being, serotonin from the 
diet cannot cross the blood–brain barrier and can only be produced in the brain; however, 
serotonin from the diet can have other potentially relevant roles including broncho- and 
vasoconstrictor, antihypertonic, antioxidant and antiallergic and antidiuretic effects. It can also 
help to modulate the volume and acidity of gastric juice. Spermine and spermidine (reported 
amounts for each vary from non-identified to more than 150 µg per 100 mL brew) are efficient 
free radical scavengers in several chemical and enzymatic systems. Other amines have also 
shown positive effects on health when in low quantities (Gloria and Engeseth, 2017).
2.4  Undesirable compounds in coffee
A few compounds derived from microbial contamination (ocratoxin A, biogenic amines), 
pesticides or chemical reactions that occur during the roasting process (mainly acrylamide, 

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
11
furan and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons – PAH) have been of concern to health authorities 
such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
2.4.1  Ocratoxin A
Ocratoxin A and similar toxins are derived from green bean contamination with mould and 
can be avoided by carefully harvesting, processing and storing coffee, which is reflected in 
good quality. Ocratoxin A is gradually degraded by the high temperatures of roasting and 
its residual levels in roasted coffee are regulated in many countries. In the European Union, 
regulation 1881/2006 states that for roasted coffees, the maximum limit is 5 µg per kg.
2.4.2  Pesticides
Pesticides comprise a large number of substances belonging to different chemical groups, 
which are used to control plant diseases, pests or weeds. They can be neurotoxic or inhibit 
vital metabolic reactions in living beings, targeting different mechanisms, and individual 
pesticides present different levels of toxicity. In order to protect human safety and health 
resulting from pesticide application during coffee production, many countries have put these 
chemicals under strict legislation and surveillance. For example, in the United States, the FDA 
establishes the maximum amount of a pesticide allowed to remain in food, as part of the 
process of regulating pesticides. Presently, tolerance limits for about 43 pesticides in coffee 
are listed by the FDA. In Japan, the maximum tolerated residual limits are amongst the lowest 
(often 0.01 ppm). Despite all the regulations, pesticide residues have been found via analyses 
of green coffee performed prior to importing at differing occasions and in different countries. 
Due to restrictions and monitoring, the residual levels of pesticides in commercial ground 
and roasted coffees are usually very low and within the established limits. The solubility 
of residual pesticides after roasting is often low and therefore low amounts are found in 
the brew, especially in filtered coffee. However, the toxicity of their metabolites in seeds or 
degradation products during roasting has not been well studied and could be higher than 
that of the pesticides themselves (Farah, 2012; Cunha and Fernandes, 2017).
2.4.3  Acrylamide, furan and PAH
Acrylamide, furan and PAH are derived from reactions that occur during roasting, more 
specifically Maillard and pyrolysis (Farah, 2012), which can occur in many other heated 
foods such as French fries or bread. Studies assessing the risk of their concentrations in 
brews have not found considerable amounts which could cause harm to human health, as 
epidemiological studies have failed to find a link between these compounds in coffee and an 
elevated risk of cancer or other diseases (Lipworth et al., 2012; Nkondjock, 2012).Amongst all 
these compounds, acrylamide is the most abundant and the one which many food and health 
authorities have been most concerned about. It is formed at the beginning of the roasting 
process and its levels decrease thereafter to a certain degree (Farah, 2012). Acrylamide has 
been associated with cancer in one study using laboratory rodents which were exposed to 
extremely high concentrations (1000–10 000 times physiological ranges) (Mucci and Adami, 
2009). Whilst the US FDA (FDA, 2016) reported that coffee is a significant source of acrylamide 
exposure for adults, the EFSA’s recent opinion on acrylamide stated that health authorities 
do not see any direct evidence of cancer risk (EFSA 4104, 2015b; Folmer et al., 2017). The 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
12
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
European Commission’s recommended indicative value is 450 µg acrylamide per kg of roast 
and ground coffee, a level which is generally achievable for commercial products.
Furan, hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) and furfural are heterocyclic, low molecular weight 
molecules with a furan ring and potential carcinogenicity in common. Furan has been 
classified as a possible carcinogen (Group 2B) by the International Agency for Research 
on Cancer (IARC). Group 2B status is assigned to compounds and exposure conditions 
for which there is limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and insufficient evidence 
of carcinogenicity in experimental animals, and therefore requires further investigation. 
No human studies are available regarding the effects of furan and there is a significant 
uncertainty in the extrapolation of risk from animal assays performed in the laboratory 
to the equivalent risk for humans. When dealing with furfuryl and furan derivatives, the 
EFSA report (EFSA, 2011) concluded that notwithstanding some indications of in vitro 
genotoxicity, based on available data of exposure and on in vivo genotoxicity studies, which 
gave negative results for the carcinogenicity evaluation in rats and mice, under normal 
conditions, these compounds are of no concern to human health (Folmer et al., 2017). 
Regulatory bodies, including the US FDA and the EFSA, have made no recommendations 
regarding the maximum levels of furan in the dietary intake.
In coffee, these compounds are formed during the roasting stage mainly via thermal 
degradation/Maillard reaction of reducing sugars, alone or in combination with amino 
acids or via the thermal degradation of amino acids. The consumed levels of furan in coffee 
are highly variable and reflect not only the preparation methods but also the roasting 
conditions; however, these compounds are not exclusive to coffee. The major contributors 
to furan exposure in adults and teenagers were estimated to be fruit juice, and milk-based 
and cereal-based products. Additionally, jarred baby foods were also major contributors 
in toddlers (Ferreira et al., 2017).
Examples of a range of furan concentrations, obtained using coffees from the Spanish 
market prepared by different methods, are 12–146 µg per litre with the lowest values 
found in instant and filtered coffee and the highest values found in espresso. Boiled 
coffee was not evaluated. The concentration for commercially packed coffee capsules was 
approximately 240 µg per litre. The furan content of coffee brews from automatic coffee 
vending machines ranged from 11 to 262 µg per litre; however, this is not representative 
of what people would consume. Due to its high volatility, after coffee preparation, losses 
occur rapidly upon mixing and waiting for the brew to cool down (Ferreira et al., 2017).
The most important contributors of HMF in the diet are dried fruits, caramel, vinegar, bread 
and coffee. The content of HMF in coffee samples from coffee vending machines (8 g of 
ground coffee to 100 mL water) ranged between 4 and 60 mg per litre with a mean content 
of 28.8 mg per litre. The concentrations of furfural in coffee brews from European vending 
machines ranged between 0.30 and 1.30 mg per litre (Ferreira et al., 2017). To date, no 
measures have been identified to mitigate furan without impacting the typical coffee aroma.
PAH, from which benzo[a]pyrene is the most relevant from a toxicity point of view, 
can be formed in coffee and other foods that are severely roasted or exposed to very 
high temperatures. This compound is classified by the IARC as probably carcinogenic 
to humans. However, the level of exposure to PAH from coffee is low and within the safe 
limits set by International Agencies (IARC, 2010; EFSA, 2008).
2.4.4  Biogenic amines
Biogenic amines are organic bases of low molecular weight that participate in the regular 
metabolic processes of plants, microorganisms and animals. They are produced in the 

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
13
body and can also be provided by the diet and from the microbial flora of the intestine; at 
high concentrations, however, they can pose a toxicological risk.
Examples include histidine, tyramine, tryptamine, cadaverine and putrescine. Histidine 
is the most toxic and is associated with a hypotensive effect and headaches. Putrescine, 
cadaverine and tyramine seem to be toxic in higher doses in animals, but the individual 
sensitivity to these compounds in humans varies considerably and causes different responses. 
In coffee, biogenic amines originate from the action of microbial enzymes on amino acids 
during fermentative processes, suggesting inappropriate storage or low-quality defective 
fermented seeds. Roasting may deconjugate and increase the amount of some free biogenic 
amines, whilst most other amines are degraded (Gloria and Engeseth, 2017b; Farah, 2012).
3  Main beneficial health effects of coffee
The role of coffee drinking for the purpose of socialization and relaxation is indirectly 
important for health, as stress plays a major role in the development of several diseases 
that may lead to serious complications and death. Additionally, coffee has been shown 
to help prevent degenerative disorders, many of which are related to neurostimulating, 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects. A prospective US cohort study (Freedman et al., 
2012) examined the association of coffee drinking with subsequent cause-specific and 
total mortality in the National Institutes of Health– AARP Diet and Health Study. This study 
involved more than 400 000 people and is, so far, the largest human study investigating 
coffee and health. A significant inverse association between coffee and specific deaths 
due to heart disease, respiratory disease, stroke, injuries and accidents, diabetes and 
infections was found (all of which are amongst the 10 leading causes of death, WHO, 
2017–Fig.1). Total mortality was reduced considerably by up to 16% for both men and 
women who drank 4–5 cups of coffee a day. Similar associations were observed whether 
participants drank predominantly caffeinated or decaffeinated coffee (Folmer et al., 2017). 
Although scientific studies can link certain compounds to specific mechanisms, it is likely 
that most contributions to decreasing the risk of certain diseases are caused by synergistic 
or additive effects with various compounds present in coffee. The next section presents 
summaries of research results on the effect of coffee and health, exploring the most 
studied effects individually.
3.1  Coffee consumption for mental and physical performance 
and well-being
The stimulating effect of coffee is well known and is due to caffeine’s ability to enhance 
mental performance, which includes enhancing alertness and perception (Einother and 
Giesbrecht, 2012). According to the EFSA, who reviewed existing evidence of caffeine 
on mental performance (EFSA 2045, 2011c), generally, a dose of 75 mg is required to 
obtain these effects, although very large differences in individual responses to caffeine 
are observed. Caffeine consumption can also improve other functions such as memory 
(Nehlig, 2010; Borota et al., 2014) and mood (Smith, 2005; Olson et al., 2010). Coffee 
components other than caffeine have also been shown to influence cognitive performance 
in an elderly population, though to a smaller extent than caffeine. Decaffeinated coffee 
enriched in chlorogenic acids can improve alertness and reduce headaches and mental 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
14
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
fatigue in comparison to non-enriched decaffeinated coffee. The effects may be partly 
attributed to chlorogenic acids, but other compounds naturally present in coffee are also 
suggested to play a role (Camfield et al., 2013; Cropley et al., 2012; Folmer et al., 2017).
The large inter-individual variability of the stimulating effects of caffeine is due to the 
difference in the ability to metabolize and eliminate it from the body. Whilst for most 
people, it takes about three to six hours to eliminate 50–75% of the caffeine and its 
metabolites (Goldstein, 2010), for some people, it can take much longer. The effects 
of several cups of coffee on these individuals, usually called ‘slow metabolizers’, may 
therefore be accumulative for a while. The variability in the enzymatic breakdown of 
caffeine may account for its variable effect on sleep induction and arousal (Youngberg 
et al., 2011). The stimulating effects of caffeine tend to be stronger when the individual is 
in a state of fatigue or in elderly people (van Boxtel and Schmitt, 2004). However, habitual 
caffeine consumers may suffer less from these issues as they develop a tolerance. In this 
case, caffeine will, for example, still disrupt their sleep, but to a lesser extent than for 
people who are not habitual consumers (Childs and de Wit, 2012; Drapeau, 2006). It is the 
responsibility of each person to pay attention to his or her response to caffeine intake at 
different times of the day, and adapt intake patterns accordingly.
Coffee and other caffeine vehicles have been used by athletes for a long time, and 
the initial papers discussing the mechanisms involved date back to 1978 (Costill, 1978). 
More specifically, caffeine exerts a positive effect on the endurance and exercise capacity, 
due to the effect on neural mechanisms (Spriet and Gibala, 2004;Folmer et al., 2017). 
Caffeine also seems to reduce the pain perception due to an increase in the secretion 
of β-endorphins which exhibit analgesic properties (O’Connor et al., 2004). It is well 
documented that caffeine can enhance endurance and coordination, stop–go events (e.g. 
team and racket sports) and sports involving sustained high-intensity activity lasting from 
Figure 1 The ten leading causes of death in the world by percentage (data from WHO, 2017, updated 
in 2014).

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
15
1 min up to an hour (e.g. swimming, rowing and running races) (Jenkins, 2008; Hogervost 
et al., 2008; Folmer et al., 2017).
Based on the scientific studies, the active dose of caffeine was found to be 3 mg per kg 
of bodyweight, to be taken 1 h before exercise (EFSA, 2054, 2011c; Goldstein et al., 2010). 
For a person weighing about 70 kg, this amount would thus be equivalent to 210 mg. 
According to the EFSA caffeine safety report (EFSA 4102, 2015a), it is safe to consume 
single doses of 200 mg of caffeine less than 2 h prior to intense exercise. However, the 
amount and time prior to exercise for an optimal effect will vary for different individuals 
due to differences in metabolic rates (Folmer et al., 2017). In 1994, caffeine was removed 
from the list of banned substances.
The impact of caffeine on the mental and physical health of women and children is 
a more recent area of interest, even if the initial papers appeared in the early 1990s. 
Evidence suggests that the normal hormonal changes during pregnancy slow the body’s 
ability to metabolize caffeine. Therefore, a given dose of caffeine can have longer-lasting 
effects (as long as 15 h in the third trimester) (Kuczkowski, 2009). Even though the EFSA 
report on caffeine safety (EFSA 4102, 2015a) concludes that its consumption is safe 
for pregnant and lactating women, it recommends an intake reduction to a maximum 
of 200 mg throughout the day. Based on scientific findings, there is no risk of adverse 
birth weights for caffeine consumption below these values. Nevertheless, the risks of very 
high intake (more than 600 mg of caffeine per day) include foetal growth retardation and 
low weight for gestational age (Sengpiel et al., 2013). Although there is no consensus in 
studies suggesting that caffeine could delay the time of conception, it may be prudent for 
women who have difficulty in conceiving to limit the caffeine intake to less than 300 mg 
per day (Higdon and Frei, 2006; Folmer et al., 2017).
It is known that caffeine is present in the milk of lactating coffee drinkers with a peak 
appearing about 1 h after consuming a caffeinated beverage (Stavchansky et al., 1988; 
Nehlig and Debry, 1994). For this reason, doctors recommend that breastfeeding women 
keep caffeine intake below 200 mg per day (EFSA 4102, 2015a). At these levels, studies 
show that the sleep time of nursing infants is similar to controls (Santos et al., 2012; Clarc 
and Landholt, 2016; Folmer et al., 2017).
When it comes to children and coffee consumption, there are major cultural differences 
in both overall coffee consumption and consumption guidelines. For example, in most 
European countries, habitual coffee consumption starts when children become adults, and 
until the age of 10, chocolate and tea are the main sources of caffeine (EFSA 4102, 2015a). 
Brazil has implemented an active coffee school programme based on the findings that 
20% coffee added to a glass of whole milk helps children perform better in school (ABIC, 
2016). Additionally, there are studies that show that caffeine may attenuate the symptoms 
of attention-deficit syndrome (Garfinkel et al., 1981). European adolescents consume less 
coffee and their source of caffeine intake is widely distributed amongst different types 
of food and beverages (EFSA 4102, 2015a). In the United States, this section of the 
population primarily consumes caffeine from soft drinks (USDA, 2015).
As information on the impact of caffeine on the health of children and adolescents is 
scarce, it is difficult to derive general conclusions on safe intake levels. Caffeine doses of 
about 1.4 mg per kg bodyweight or more may impact sleep quality in adults, particularly 
when consumed close to bedtime (EFSA 4102, 2015a). For this reason, and because data 
on safe habitual caffeine intake for children and adolescents are insufficient, the EFSA 
suggests a limit of 3 mg of caffeine per kg of bodyweight per day (EFSA 4102, 2015a), 
which would equal around 90 mg for a 10-year old (Folmer et al., 2017).

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
16
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Canadian authorities are more conservative and suggest a limit of 2.5 mg per kg of 
bodyweight per day (Health Canada, 2011). The short-term risk associated with children 
and caffeine consumption is that caffeine may cause anxiety and nervousness (Nawrot 
et al., 2003).
3.2  Coffee and cognitive health
The acute effects of caffeine were discussed in the mental performance section. In this 
section, we will look at the long-term effects of coffee on reducing the risk of cognitive 
degenerative diseases. Cognitive functions such as verbal ability, inductive reasoning and 
perceptual speed decrease after 20 years of age. Genetics, life events and lifestyle factors 
impact the rate and amplitude of this decline (Hedden and Gabrieli, 2004; Folmer et al., 
2017). A large number of epidemiological studies relate the regular consumption of coffee 
to a reduced appearance of cognitive decline in the elderly (Arab et al., 2013; Ritchie, 
2007; Corley, 2010). A meta-analysis of these human studies suggests that there is a clear 
protective effect of caffeine consumption, rather than from coffee itself (Santos et al., 
2010; Ryan, 2002).
Alzheimer’s disease is the most frequent cause of dementia, leading to a progressive 
cognitive decline. Whilst there is currently no medication for Alzheimer’s disease (Waite, 
2015), there are studies that show an inverse association between the coffee consumption 
and the development of Alzheimer’s disease, with a 27% risk reduction (Barranco Quintana 
et al., 2007; Waite, 2015; Folmer et al., 2017). The mechanism is believed to be related to the 
anti-inflammatory effect of caffeine on the A1 and A2 receptors, in addition to reducing the 
deposits of toxic beta-amyloid peptide in the brain, a pathological characteristic in patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease (Rosso, 2008; Arendash and Cao, 2010). In addition to caffeine, 
the intake of polyphenols also seems to help decrease the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Emerging evidence from animal models also links chlorogenic acids to the prevention of 
neurodegenerative disease and ageing (Esposito et al., 2002; Ramassamy, 2006). Although 
the involvement of coffee polyphenols in the human cognitive function has not been well 
studied, the number of findings on the in vitro neuroprotective effects of polyphenols in 
general is rapidly increasing (Lakey-Beitia, et al., 2015). Initial indications relate the anti-
inflammatory effects of polyphenols to the reduced risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. 
Other proposed mechanisms could be i) inhibition of the enzymes acetylcholinesterase 
and butyrylcholinesterase in the brain, as this retards acetylcholine and butyrylcholine 
breakdown and ii) the prevention of oxidative stress–induced neurodegeneration due to its 
high antioxidative activity (Oboh et al., 2013, Folmer et al., 2017).
Similar to Alzheimer’s disease, a large number of epidemiological studies have reported 
an inverse relationship between the caffeine consumption and the risk of developing 
Parkinson’s disease. The latter is a neuropathological disorder that slows down the 
motor function, whilst generating resting tremors, muscular rigidity, gait disturbances 
and impairing postural reflex. It involves the degeneration of neurons in the brainstem 
(Kuwana et al., 1999). Coffee consumption appears to reduce, or delay, the development 
of Parkinson’s disease. From the meta-analysis of 26 studies, a 25% lower risk of Parkinson’s 
disease was found in coffee drinkers compared with non-coffee drinkers. The mechanism 
is probably related to the capacity of caffeine to block the A2 adenosine receptors in the 
brain (Costa et al., 2010). Studies recently outlined a possible additional mechanism. A 
rodent model showed that trigonelline may exert a neuroprotective effect, inducing a 
significant reversal of motor dysfunction (Nathan et al., 2014; Folmer et al., 2017).

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
17
3.3  Coffee and cardiovascular disease
One of the misinterpretations linking coffee and health stemmed from the belief that 
the risk of cardiovascular disease, the leading cause of death in the world according to 
the WHO (13.2% and 2% of deaths due to ischaemic and hypertensive cardiovascular 
diseases, respectively, WHO, 2017;Fig.1), was increased by drinking coffee. This belief was 
supported by the fact that caffeine increases blood pressure and acutely reduces insulin 
sensitivity after coffee consumption. However, it is now known that most acute caffeine 
effects cease to exist with regular coffee consumption due to adaptation mechanisms 
and that other coffee components, mainly chlorogenic acids and trigonelline, have 
compensatory effects on endothelial dysfunction and insulin resistance. Additionally, 
in vitro and animal studies indicate that coffee has high antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
potential, improves endothelial dysfunction and reduces insulin resistance, which are key 
mechanisms for cardiovascular protection (Rebello and Van Dam, 2013).
Corroborating these findings, dozens of studies have shown the inverse association 
between coffee consumption and cardiovascular diseases. Andersen et al. (2006) 
studied the relationship of coffee drinking with total mortality and mortality attributed to 
cardiovascular disease, cancer and other diseases with a major inflammatory component. 
A total of 41 836 postmenopausal women aged 55–69 years at baseline were followed 
for 15 years. During this period, there were 4265 deaths. Evaluating the causes of 
mortality, the authors observed that coffee consumption increasingly reduced the risk 
of cardiovascular and other inflammatory diseases in postmenopausal women, thereby 
decreasing mortality from these diseases. This effect was attributed to the ability of coffee 
to inhibit inflammatory processes via its antioxidative and anti-inflammatory compounds.
A meta-analysis was carried out by Crippa et al. (2014), using 21 prospective studies, 
with 997 464 participants and 121 915 reported deaths. Results indicated that coffee 
consumption is inversely associated with all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality 
and that the risk was increasingly reduced for those who consumed 3 to 4 cups. Similar 
results were observed by Malerba et al. (2013).
Another recent study by Ding et al. (2015) examined the causes of death of 19 524 
women and 12 432 men from two large cohort studies in the United States, the Harvard 
Health Professionals Follow-up Study and the Nurses’ Health Study (1 and 2). Inverse 
associations were observed between the consumption of regular and decaffeinated coffee 
and the deaths due to cardiovascular and neurological diseases. When restricting to those 
that had never smoked, the all-cause mortality risk was also increasingly reduced as the 
number of cups increased; however, higher consumption reduced the benefit somewhat.
Stroke is the second leading cause of death in the world as estimated by the WHO 
(11.9% of the total deaths, WHO, 2017; Fig.1); however, data on the association between 
coffee consumption and risk of stroke are scarce. A study by Lopez-Garcia (2009) 
analysed data from a prospective cohort of 83 076 women in the Nurses’ Health Study for 
24 years. Results evidenced that long-term coffee consumption is not associated with an 
increased risk of stroke in women. In contrast, data suggested that coffee consumption 
may modestly reduce this risk. Decaffeinated coffee was associated with a trend towards 
a lower risk of stroke after adjustment for caffeinated coffee consumption. Using data 
from 11 prospective studies with 479 689 participants and 10 003 cases of stroke, a meta-
analysis performed by Larsson and Orsini (2011) corroborated the results obtained for 
women, finding an inverse, although modest, association between moderate coffee 
consumption and risk of stroke.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
18
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
3.4  Coffee and type2 diabetes
Diabetes mellitus is characterized by a high blood glucose level, which can cause 
complications such as cardiovascular diseases, stroke, chronic kidney failure, foot ulcers 
and damage to the eyes (IDF, 2012). There are three main types of diabetes: type 1, in 
which the pancreas fails to produce enough insulin and which is generally genetically 
determined; type 2 diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the world (2.7% 
of the universal deaths, WHO, 2017), starts with insulin resistance (lack of insulin may 
also develop) and is promoted by obesity and a sedentary lifestyle (Coope et al., 2015); 
and gestational diabetes, an often transient disease that occurs when pregnant women 
develop a high blood sugar level (IDF, 2015; Folmer et al., 2017).
Floegel et al. (2012) investigated the association between the coffee consumption 
and the risk of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes. They used data from 42 659 
participants collected over 8.9 years from the European Prospective Investigation into 
Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort. They found an inverse association of consumption of 
more than 4 cups (150 mL) of regular coffee per day with the overall risk of type 2 diabetes.
A number of similar studies have observed such effects related to regular coffee 
drinking. A recent meta-analysis of large epidemiological studies confirmed the link 
between moderate coffee consumption and a reduced risk of developing type 2 diabetes 
across different populations (Ding et al., 2014). The findings from these systematic studies 
demonstrate a clear inverse association between the coffee consumption and the risk of 
developing diabetes. Compared with no, or infrequent, coffee consumption, the risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes was reduced linearly, with a 33% reduction for 6 cups per 
day. In a similar comparison, drinking up to four cups per day of decaffeinated coffee was 
associated with a 20% reduced risk (Ding et al., 2014). This suggests that the protective 
effects of coffee on diabetes are independent of caffeine.
Animal studies have indicated that the main compounds responsible for the protective 
effect are chlorogenic acids (Kempf, 2010) and its derivatives, as well as trigonelline (van 
Dijk et al., 2009; Rios et al., 2015). They appear to preferentially target hepatic glucose 
metabolism by improving insulin sensitivity (Lecoultre et al., 2014). Other proposed 
mechanisms observed in in vivo and in vitro studies include the regulation of key enzymes 
of glucose and lipid metabolism, such as glucokinase, glucose-6-phosphatase, fatty acid 
synthase and carnitinepalmitoyltransferase (Waite, 2015). In a human study, trigonelline 
generated significantly lower glucose and insulin levels after an oral glucose load 
compared with a placebo (Rios et al., 2015).
3.5  Coffee and liver diseases
There are a number of diseases that can impact liver health and include both liver cancer 
and cirrhosis, a progressive disease caused by liver steatosis (fatty liver) and alcohol abuse, 
where the healthy tissue is replaced by the scar tissue and eventually prevents the liver 
from functioning correctly (Saab et al., 2014). According to a recent meta-analysis of 16 
human studies, coffee consumption reduces the risk of developing liver cancer by 40% 
compared with no coffee consumption (Larsson and Wolk, 2007; Bravi et al., 2013).
In a clinical study performed in Brazil, caffeine consumption greater than 123 mg per 
day was also associated with reduced hepatic fibrosis (Machado et al., 2014). In addition, 
the study observed positive effects of regular coffee consumption in patients with chronic 
hepatitis C.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
19
A number of in vitro studies have demonstrated the strong role of the chlorogenic 
acids present in coffee in protecting the liver from damage at various levels, possibly by 
preventing cell apoptosis and oxidative stress damage due to the activation of the body’s 
natural antioxidant and anti-inflammatory systems (Ji et al., 2013). Coffee melanoidins have 
also been reported to have a protective effect on liver steatosis in obese rats (Vitaglione 
et al., 2012), which suggests that the melanoidins in coffee may have an influence on liver 
fat and functionality. Although melanoidins do not seem to be absorbed in humans, they 
can function as an antioxidant dietary fibre, like the unabsorbed portion of chlorogenic 
acids, quenching radicals and improving the reduced/oxidized glutathione balance in 
the colon. At the same time, they may act to promote the growth of a beneficial colon 
microbiota, affecting inflammatory pathways in the colon and consequently in the liver 
(Folmer et al., 2017).
3.6  Coffee and cancer
In the broadest sense, cancer represents the final result of abnormal cell growth and can 
occur in most human tissues. The carcinogenicity of coffee drinking was assessed by the 
IARC in 1991. At that time, coffee was classified as ‘possibly carcinogenic to humans’ 
(Group 2B), based on limited evidence of an association with cancer of the urinary bladder 
from case-control studies, and inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental 
animals. When subsequent studies were controlled for smoking, they failed to show an 
elevated risk of bladder cancer (Butt and Sultan, 2011). Recently, the IARC re-evaluated 
the carcinogenicity of drinking coffee and other hot beverages (Loomis et al., 2016), using 
a much larger database of more than 1000 observational and experimental studies. In 
assessing the accumulated epidemiological evidence, more weight was given to well-
conducted prospective cohort and population-based case-control studies that controlled 
adequately for important potential confounding factors, including smoking (tobacco) and 
alcohol consumption. In conclusion, there was no consistent evidence associating drinking 
coffee with bladder cancer. In contrast, for endometrial cancer, the five largest cohort studies 
showed mostly inverse associations with coffee drinking. These results were supported by 
the findings of several case-control studies and a meta-analysis. Inverse associations with 
coffee drinking were also observed in cohort and case-control studies of liver cancer in 
Asia, Europe and North America. A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies estimated 
that the risk of liver cancer decreases proportionally with coffee intake. No association or 
a modest inverse association for female breast cancers was found. Similarly, no association 
was found for pancreas and prostate cancers. Data were also available for more than 20 
other cancers, including lung, colorectal, stomach, oesophageal, oral cavity, ovarian and 
brain cancers and childhood leukaemia. Although the volume of data for some of these 
cancers was substantial, evidence was inadequate for all the other cancers reviewed for 
reasons including inconsistency of findings across studies, inadequate control for potential 
confounding factors, potential for measurement error, selection bias or recall bias or 
insufficient numbers of studies (Loomis et al., 2016). As a result of this re-evaluation, coffee 
was upgraded by the IARC and is no longer considered to be potentially carcinogenic. 
In summary, epidemiological data demonstrated that coffee consumption is actually 
associated with a lower overall risk of cancer, especially liver and endometrial cancers.
There are several compounds in coffee that have been found to play a protective role 
against cancer, and the most well-known are chlorogenic acids and their derivatives. The 
contribution of melanoidins has also been suggested to decrease the risk of colon cancer 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
20
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
(see chlorogenic acids and melanoidins topics in this chapter). Based on in vitro and animal 
evidence, coffee diterpenes are also strong candidates.
Epidemiologic studies have shown an increased risk of oesophageal cancer from 
drinking hot beverages such as maté, tea or coffee. It has been observed that the intra-
oesophageal temperature is increased by 6–12°C when coffee was drunk at 65°C (Islami 
et al., 2009). The high-temperature injures the oesophageal mucosa and consequently 
causes inflammation or forms reactive nitrogen species, a type of free radical. It has been 
suggested by the IARC that drinking coffee, and other hot beverages, at temperatures 
above 65°C increases the risk of oesophageal cancer (Loomis et al., 2016). Although in 
some countries, coffee is consumed at temperatures below 65°C, in other countries, the 
temperature can be much higher. In public places, serving coffee at very high temperatures 
may influence people to drink it hotter than they would at home, so people should be 
aware of this factor for all hot beverages, soups and hot foods in general.
4  Potential side effects of coffee drinking
4.1  Hyper stimulation and sleep quality and duration by caffeine
Caffeinated coffee can cause irritability and anxiety, and reduce sleep quality by increasing 
the time required to fall asleep, interfering with the depth of sleep and reducing the total 
time spent sleeping. It can also cause more frequent awakening or sleep fragmentation 
(Folmer et al., 2017; Clarc and Landholt, 2016; Huang et al., 2011). The use of caffeine 
in energy drinks, and the risk of overdosing in children, motivated health authorities to 
evaluate and publish guidelines on safe caffeine consumption. The most recent report 
is the EFSA’s 2015 scientific opinion on caffeine safety (EFSA 4102, 2015a). National 
health authorities have also published reports like the US Department of Agriculture 
report (2015). The general agreement is that the habitual consumption of up to 400 mg 
of caffeine per day, and up to 200 mg per serving, does not cause safety concerns for 
non-pregnant adults. Considering a range between 100 and 200 mg caffeine per cup, this 
would translate into 2–4 cups per day.
4.2  Caffeine tolerance, dependence and withdrawal
Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance in the world, and the issue of 
possible dependence on caffeine has been discussed for many years. In fact, different 
drugs affect different people in different ways, and caffeine is no exception. It is therefore 
difficult to make general statements on dependence, tolerance and withdrawal; however, 
there is no such brain circuit that links caffeine to dependence. Caffeine does not affect 
areas involved in reinforcing and rewarding (Nehlig, 2010). According to the standard for 
measuring any potential drug abuse and dependence (as defined by the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV, American Psychiatric Association, 2000), 
there are no criteria that qualify caffeine for potential drug abuse (Folmer et al., 2017).
As with any drug, regular caffeine users will establish a partial tolerance to caffeine. 
However, studies have shown that this tolerance only applies to effects such as jitteriness, 
anxiety and an increased heart rate. Users do not develop a tolerance to the benefits of 
caffeine consumption such as improved mental performance, although sometimes slightly 
higher doses of caffeine are required (Satel, 2006).

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
21
The types of caffeine withdrawal symptoms which are most often reported are 
headaches; feelings of weariness, weakness and drowsiness; impaired concentration; 
fatigue and work difficulty; depression; anxiety; irritability; increased muscle tension and 
occasional tremors, nausea or vomiting. Withdrawal symptoms generally peak 20–48 h 
after the last caffeine was consumed, although users can generally avoid these if caffeine 
consumption is progressively decreased (Nehlig, 2010; Folmer et al., 2017).
Excessive coffee intake does not cause organic toxicity, but it can generate negative 
side effects, such as those associated with caffeine withdrawal. Symptoms related to the 
toxicity of coffee can occur at levels well below fatal doses; for example, concentrations 
above 15 mg caffeine per kg of bodyweight may be toxic for the cardiovascular, nervous 
and gastrointestinal systems (e.g. 1 g of caffeine for a person weighing 70 kg). Although 
such caffeine levels are not easily obtained through acute coffee intake, users may easily 
consume caffeine pills in such quantities. Reported overdose symptoms are hypertension 
or hypotension, tachycardia, vomiting, fever, delusion, hallucinations, arrhythmia, cardiac 
arrest, coma and death. Fatalities most commonly result from seizures and cardiac 
arrhythmias at plasma levels of 100–180 µg per mL (Childs and de Wit, 2012; Folmer et al., 
2017). However, caffeine-related deaths have not been associated with coffee drinking 
(Yamamoto, 2015).
4.3  Cholesterol-raising effects of diterpenes
Epidemiologic and mechanistic studies have reported that the diterpenes, cafestol, and 
to a lesser extent, kahweol, naturally found in coffee oil and in unfiltered coffees, can 
alter lipid enzymes and thus influence cholesterol levels. This relationship was found to 
be linear with increasing cafestol consumption (Urgert and Katan, 1997). A meta-analysis 
of a set of 18 clinical intervention trials on coffee consumption and cholesterol and serum 
lipids was performed by Jee et al. (2001). The authors corroborated the dose–response 
relationship between coffee consumption and cholesterol and observed a strong increase 
upon the consumption of 6 or more cups of boiled coffee per day, which was not observed 
when a paper filter was used.
The high consumption of diterpenes has been associated with elevated homocysteine 
and low-density lipoprotein levels in human plasma, which may indirectly increase the risk 
of cardiovascular diseases (Farah, 2012).
4.4  Gastro-oesophageal reflux or heartburn
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, also called heartburn, is caused by the reflux of gastric fluid 
into the oesophagus due to the low pressure in the sphincter muscle at the junction of 
the stomach and oesophagus. A number of people suffering from this condition have 
mentioned that coffee may be one of the food products causing this complaint. Although 
some studies have tried to investigate this, the role of coffee consumption in reflux is still 
unclear. It has, for example, been reported that a few compounds in coffee stimulate the 
production of gastric juice, which is very acidic when first produced in the stomach (pH 
1–2). Chlorogenic acids, Nβ-alkanoil-5-hydroxytryptamides (C5HTs) from coffee wax, and 
to a lesser extent, caffeine, are some of the main compounds thought to promote this 
effect (Fehlau and Netter, 1990). Additionally, it has been hypothesized that the roasting 
products of chlorogenic acid such as pyrogallol, like C5HTs, irritate the gastric mucosa 
(Darboven, 1997). In addition to the stimulation of gastric juice, coffee consumption also 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
22
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
seems to cause muscle contraction impairment (relaxation effect) of the lower oesophageal 
sphincter in some individuals, promoting heartburn, which has been attributed to caffeine 
(Terry et al., 2000). The pH of a coffee brew is mildly acidic, commonly fluctuating between 
5.8 and 5.5 in robusta coffees and between 4.3 and 4.8 in fresh lightly roasted acidic 
arabica coffees, with approximately pH 5.0 being more usual in dark roasted blends. This 
is much higher than the pH of gastric juice or, for example, the pH of apple juice (pH 
4.3–3.3) or citric juice (pH 2.3–3.3) (Farah, unpublished).
Therefore, based on current knowledge, the stimulation of gastric juice production 
along with the relaxation of the oesophageal sphincter seems to be the most likely causes 
for heartburn, although some studies support the contribution of the acidity of foods 
to heartburn (Feldman and Barnett, 1995). Since there are only a few studies on this 
subject and none in humans, more mechanistic and clinical studies are necessary to prove 
the involvement of each of these specific coffee compounds in this disease, as well as 
improving conditions in their absence.
Some pre-roasting technological methods have been developed which aim to decrease 
heartburn, although no clinical studies have yet proved that these treatments are effective 
in humans. Reducing coffee wax, and thus C5HTs, can be achieved by applying steam 
treatment, either as a stand-alone process, or as part of the water or CO2 decaffeination 
methodologies (which in addition decreases the content of chlorogenic acids and caffeine).
5  Final considerations
Since the initial studies published in medical journals in the eighteenth century, coffee 
has been through many waves of approval and disapproval. As science has evolved and 
confounding factors could be accounted for, an increasing number of studies have found 
correlations between coffee consumption and reduced risk of developing certain diseases. 
As in vitro and animal studies confirm the involvement of active coffee components in 
specific diseases, the challenge remains to fully understand the mechanisms that these 
active compounds exert, as coffee is a molecularly highly complex beverage made up of 
thousands of compounds. It is, however, becoming more evident that it is not only the 
specific compounds in coffee, but rather the beverage as a whole that is responsible for its 
beneficial effects.
Despite the potentially positive contribution of coffee to reducing the risk of certain 
diseases, these findings need to be related to each other and, more importantly, to 
lifestyle factors that influence the risk of developing certain diseases and longevity. Some 
of these include not smoking, good nutrition (a balanced and varied diet including five 
servings of fruit and vegetables daily), exercise, low alcohol consumption and low stress, 
all of which have a strong documented impact on disease prevention and life expectation 
(Khaw et al., 2008).
6  Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Britta Folmer, from Nestlé Nespresso SA, for her valuable 
contribution to this chapter. The Research scholarships provided by the Brazilian National 

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
23
Council for Scientific and Technological Development – CNPq and the Research Support 
Foundation of Rio de Janeiro – FAPERJ are greatly appreciated.
7  Where to look for further information
7.1  Recommended books
Folmer, B. (Ed). (2017). The Craft and Science of Coffee. Elsevier, London,1st edition.
Farah, A. (Ed). (2017). Coffee: Chemistry Quality and Health Implications. Royal Society of 
Chemistry, UK, 1st edition, In press.
Preedy, V. (Ed). (2015). Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention. Elsevier, London, UK, 1st 
edition.
Feng, I. (2012). Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention. IFT Press/Willey-
Blackwell, USA.
7.2  Recommended websites
••
International coffee organization (ICO): www.ico.org. The International Coffee 
Organization (ICO) is the main intergovernmental organization for coffee, bringing 
together producing and consuming countries to tackle the challenges faced by 
the world coffee sector through international cooperation. It makes a practical 
contribution to the world coffee economy and to improving the standards of living in 
developing countries by enabling government representatives to exchange views and 
coordinate coffee policies and priorities, and enabling government representatives 
to exchange views and coordinate coffee policies and priorities at regular high level. 
On this site, in addition to the information on world coffee production, exports and 
imports, general global information on coffee is also found.
••
Association for Science and Information on Coffee (ASIC): www.asic-cafe.org. ‘ASIC 
is a completely independent organization in the world whose scientific vocation is 
specifically devoted to the coffee tree, the coffee bean and the coffee drink’. On ASIC’s 
site, you will find the proceedings of the previous colloquia as well as information and 
links on the latest publications on coffee agronomy, chemistry, technology, coffee 
and health and physiological effects of coffee.
••
The Specialty Coffee Association (SCA) that is a membership-based association acts 
as a unifying force within the specialty coffee industry and works to make coffee better 
by raising standards worldwide through a collaborative and progressive approach. 
Members of the SCA include coffee retailers, roasters, producers, exporters and 
importers, as well as manufacturers of coffee equipment and related products. For 
more information, access www.sca.coffee.The SCA was formed in January 2017 
following the merger of the SCAA and SCAE, acting in the United States and Europe. 
The respective websites are currently still active and information on training, education, 
events and standards can still be found (seewww.scaa.org and www.scae.org)
••
A website fully dedicated to entire information on coffee and health is www.
coffeeandhealth.org. It is a science-based resource developed for health care and 
other professional audiences and provides the latest information and research into 
coffee, caffeine and health.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
24
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
8  References
ABIC, 2016 http ://abic.com.br/institucional/projetos-sociais/ accessed dez, 2016 and 2017.
Alcázar, A., Fernández-Cáceres, P. L., Martın-Valero, M., Pablos, F. and González, A. G., 2003. Ion 
chromatographic determination of some organic acids, chloride and phosphate in coffee and 
tea.  Talanta, Amsterdam 61(1), 95–101. 
American Psychiatric Association. 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th 
Ed. American Psychiatric Association, Arlington, VA.
Antonio, A. G., Moraes, R. S., Perrone, D., Maia, L. C., Santos, K. R. N., Iório, N. L. P. and Farah, A., 
2010. Species, roasting degree and decaffeination influence the antibacterial activity of coffee 
against Streptococcus mutans. Food Chemistry 118, 782–8.
Andersen, L. F., Jacobs Jr., D. R., Carlsen, M. H. and Blomhoff, R., 2006. Consumption of coffee is 
associated with reduced risk of death attributed to inflammatory and cardiovascular diseases in 
the Iowa Women’s Health Study. American Journal of ClinicalNutrition 83(5), 1039–46.
Arab, L., Khan, F’ and Lam, H., 2013. Epidemiologic evidence of a relationship between tea, coffee, 
or caffeine consumption and cognitive decline. Advances in Nutrition 4(1), 115–22.
Arauz, J., Rivera-Espinoza, Y., Shibayama, M. and Muriel, P., 2015. Nicotinic acid prevents experimental 
liver fibrosis by attenuating the prooxidant process. International Immunopharmacology 28(1), 
244–51.
Arendash, G. W. and Cao, C., 2010. Caffeine and coffee as therapeutics against Alzheimer’s disease. 
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20(S1), 117–26.
Balzer, H. H., 2001. Acids in coffee. In: Coffee Recent Developments (Clarke, R. J. and Vitzthum, O. 
G. (Eds). Blackwell Science, Berlin, p. 18.
Barranco Quintana, J. L., Allam, M. F., SerranoDel Castillo, A. and Fernandez-Crehuet Navajas, R., 
2007. Alzheimer’s disease and coffee: A quantitative review. Neurological Research 29, 91–5.
Bizzo, M. L. G., Farah, A., Kemp, J. A. and  Scancetti, L. B., 2015. Highlight in the history of coffee 
science related to health. In: Coffee in Health and Disease Prevention (Preedy, V. (Ed.)). Elsevier, 
London, UK, pp.11–18.
Borrelli, R. C., Esposito, F., Napolitano, A., Ritieni, A. and Fogliano, V., 2004. Characterization of a new 
potential functional ingredient: Coffee silverskin. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry 52, 
1338–43.
Boekshoten, M.V., Van Cruschten, S.T., Kosmeijer-Schuil, T.G. and Katan, M.B. 2006. Negligible 
amounts of cholesterol-raising diterpenes in coffee made with coffee pads in comparison with 
unfiltered coffee, 2006. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, 150, 2873–5.
Borota, D., Murray, E., Kecell, G., Chang, A., Watabe, J. M., Ly, M., Toscano, J. P. and Yassa, M.A., 
2014. Post-study caffeine administration enhances memory consolidation in humans. Nature 
Neuroscience 17, 201–3.
Bravi, F., Bosetti, C., Tavoni, A., Gallus, S. and La Vecchia, C., 2013.Coffee reduces risk for hepatocellular 
carcinoma: An updated meta-analysis. Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology 11, 1413–21. 
Butt, M. S. and Sultan, M. T., 2011. Coffee and it’s Consumption: Benefits and Risks. Critical Reviews 
in Food Science and Nutrition 51, 363–73.
Camfield, D. A., Silber, B. Y., Scholey, A. B., Nolidin, K., Goh, A. and Stough, C., 2013. A Randomised 
placebo-controlled trial to differentiate the acute cognitive and mood effects of chlorogenic 
acid from decaffeinated coffee. Public Library of Science One 8(12), e82897.
Carpenter, K. J., 1983. The relationship of pellagra to corn and the low availability of niacin in cereals. 
Experientia Suppl. 44: 197–222.
Casal S., 2017. Potential effects of β-carbolines on human health. In Coffee: Chemistry, Quality, and 
Health Implications (Farah, A. (Ed.)). Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Chang, W. H., Hu, S. P., Huang, Y. F., Yeh, T. S. and Liu, J. F., 2010. Effect of purple sweet potato 
leaves consumption on exercise-induced oxidative stress and IL-6 and HSP72 levels. Journal of 
Applied Physiology 109(6), 1710–15.
Childs, E. and de Wit, H., 2012. Potential mental risks. In: Coffee, Emerging Health Effects and 
Disease Prevention (Chu, Y.-F. (Ed.)). Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp. 293–306.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
25
Clarc, I. and Landholt, H. P., 2017. Coffee, caffeine and sleep: A systematic review of epidemiological 
studies and randomized controlled trials. Sleep Medicine Reviews 31, 70–8.
Cliford, M. N. 1985. Chlorogenic acids in coffee. In Chemistry, vol 1, Clarke R. J. and Macrae R. (Eds), 
Elsevier  Applied Science, London, 153–202.
Coope, A., Torsoni, A. S. and Velloso, L., 2015. Mechanisms in endocrinology: Metabolic and 
inflammatory pathways on the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. European Journal of 
Endocrinology 15, 1065.
Corley, J., Jia, X., Kyle, J. A., Gow, A. J., Brett, C. E., Starr, J. M., McNeill, G. and Deary, I. J. 2010. 
Caffeine consumption and cognitive function at age 70: The Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 study. 
Psychosomatic Medicine 72, 206–14. 
Costa, J., Lunet, N., Santos, C., Santos, J. and Vaz-Cameiro, A., 2010. Caffeine exposure and the risk 
of Parkinson’s disease: A systemic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease 20, S221–38.
Costill, D. L., Dalsky, G. P. and Fink, W. J., 1978. Effects of caffeine ingestion on metabolism and 
exercise performance. Medicine Science in Sports 10(3), 155–8.
Crippa, A., Discacciati, A., Larsson, S. C., Wolk, A. and Orsini, N., 2014. Coffee consumption and 
mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: A dose-response meta-analysis. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 180, 763–75.
Cropley, V., Croft, R., Silber, B., Neale, C., Scholey, A., Stough, C. and Schmitt, J., 2012. Does coffee 
enriched with chlorogenic acids improve mood and cognition after acute administration in 
healthy elderly? A pilot study. Psychopharmacology 219(3), 737–49.
Cunha, S. and Fernandes, J. 2017. Pesticides. In: Coffee: Chemistry, Quality and Health Implications 
(Ed.: Farah, A.). Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Darboven, A.1997. Method for the quality improvement of raw coffee by treatment with steam and 
water (in German). Europaisches Patent- € blatt, 1997/05/95109295.6.
Ding, M., Satija, A., Bhupathiraju, S. N., Hu, Y., Sun, Q., Han, J., Lopez-Garcia, E., Willet, W., van 
Dam. R. M. and Hu, F. A., 2015. Association of coffee consumption with total and cause-specific 
mortality in three large prospective cohorts.Circulation 132(24), 2305–15.
Ding, M., Bhupathiraju, S.N., Chen, M., vanDam, R. M. and  Hu, F. B., 2014. Caffeinated and 
decaffeinated coffee consumption and risk of Type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and a dose-
response meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 37(2), 569–86.
Drapeau, C., Hamel-Hebert, I., Robillard, R., Seimaoui, B., Filipini, D.  and  Carner, J., 2006. Challenging 
sleep in aging: the effects of 200 mg of caffeine during the evening in young and middle-aged 
moderate caffeine consumers. Journal of Sleep Research 15(2), 133–41. 
Einother, S. J. L. and Giesbrecht, T., 2012. Caffeine as an attention enhancer: Reviewing existing 
assumptions. Psychopharmacology 225(2), 251–74.
Esposito, E., Rotilio, D., Di Matteo, V., Di Giulio, C., Cacchio, M. and Algeri, S., 2002. A review of specific 
dietary antioxidants and the effects on biochemical mechanisms related to neurodegenerative 
processes. Neurobiology of Aging 23, 719–35.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2008. Scientific opinion of the panel on contaminants in the 
food chain on a request from the European commission on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
food. The EFSA Journal, 724, 1–114.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2011a. Scientific Opinion on Flavouring Group Evaluation 
218, Revision 1 (FGE.218Rev1): alpha, beta-Unsaturated aldehydes and precursors from 
subgroup 4.2 of FGE.19: Furfural derivatives. EFSA Journal 9(3), 1840.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2011b. EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and 
Allergies (NDA), Scientific Opinion on the substantiation of health claims related to caffeine and 
increase in physical performance during short-term high-intensity exercise (ID 737, 1486, 1489), 
increase in endurance performance (ID 737, 1486), increase in endurance capacity (ID 1488) 
and reduction in the rated perceived exertion/effort during exercise (ID 1488, 1490) pursuant to 
Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/20061. EFSA Journal 9(4), 2053.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2011c. EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and 
Allergies (NDA), Scientific Opinion on the substantiation of health claims related to caffeine and 
increased fat oxidation leading to a reduction in body fat mass (ID 735, 1484), increased energy 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
26
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
expenditure leading to a reduction in body weight (ID 1487), increased alertness (ID 736, 1101, 
1187, 1485, 1491, 2063, 2103) and increased attention (ID 736, 1485, 1491, 2375) pursuant to 
Article 13 (1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/20061. EFSA Journal 9(4), 2054.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2015a. EFSA panel on dietetic products, Nutrition and 
Allergies (NDA), scientific opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA Journal 13(5), 4102.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2015b. EFSA panel on contaminants in the food chain 
(CONTAM) scientific opinion on acrylamides in food. EFSA Journal 13(6), 4104.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), 2016. FDA Guidance for Industry Acrylamide in Foods. FDA 
Office of Food Safety, USA.
Farah, A. and Donangelo, C., 2006. Phenolic compounds in coffee. Brazilian Journal of Plant 
Physiology 18(1), 23–36.
Farah, A., 2012. Coffee constituents. In: Chu, Y.-F. (Ed.), Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease 
Prevention. IFT Press/Willey-Blackwell, USA, pp. 21–58.
Fehlau, R. and Netter, K. J.1990. Effect of untreated and non-irritating purified coffee and carbonic 
acid hydrytryptamides on the gastric mucosa in the rat Z. Gastroenterol, 28, 234–8.
Feldman, M. and Barnett, C., 1995. Relationships between the acidity and osmolarity of popular 
beverages and reported postprandial heartburn. Gastroenterology, 108, 125–31.
Feng, R., Lu, Y., Bowman, L. L., Qian, Y., Castranova, V. and Ding, M., 2005. Inhibition of activator 
Protein-1, NF-κB, and MAPKs and induction of phase 2 detoxifying enzyme activity by 
chlorogenic acid. Journal of Biological Chemistry 280, 27888–95.
Ferreira, I. M. P. L. V. O., Pinho, O. and Petisca, C., 2017. Potential effects of furan and related 
compounds on health. In: Coffee: Chemistry, Quality and Health Implications (Ed.: Farah, A.). 
Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Floegel, A., Pischon, T., Bergmann, M. M., Teucher, B., Kaaks, R, Boeing, H., 2012. Coffee consumption 
and risk of chronic disease in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 
(EPIC)–Germany study. American Journal Clinical Nutrition 95, 901–8.
Fogliano, V. and Morales, F. J., 2011. Estimation of dietary intake of melanoidins from coffee and 
bread. Food and Function 2, 117–23.
Folmer, B., Farah, A., Fogliano, V. and Jones, L. 2017. Human wellbeing – Sociability, performance 
and health. In: The Craft and Science of Coffee, 1st Ed. (Ed.: Folmer, B.). Elsevier, London, UK, 
pp. 493–510.
Freedman, N., Park, Y., Abnet, C. C., Hollenbeck, A. R. and Sinha, R., 2012. Association of coffee 
drinking with total and cause-specific mortality. New England Journal of Medicine 366(20), 
1891–904.
Garfinkel, B. D., Webster, C. D. and Sloman, L., 1981. Responses to methylphenidate and various 
does of caffeine in children with attention deficit disorder. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry/
La Revue canadienne de psychiatrie 26(6), 395–401.
Garsetti, M., Pellegrini, N., Baggio, C. and Brighenti, F., 2000. Antioxidant activity in human faeces. 
British Journal of Nutrition 84(5), 705–10.
Gebicki, J., Marcinek, A., Chlopicki S. and Adamus, J. 2008. The use of quaternary pyridinium 
compounds for vasoprotection and/or hepatoprotection. Patent WO2008104920A1.
Gerson, M., 1978. The cure of advanced cancer by diet therapy: a summary for 30 years of clinical 
experimentation. Physiological Chemistry and Physics 10, 449–64.
Glória  and Engeseth , 2017a. Potential beneficial effects of bioactive amines on health. In:Coffee: 
Chemistry, Quality, and Health Implications (Ed.: Farah, A.). Royal Society of Chemistry,  London, 
UK. In press.
Glória  and Engeseth , 2017b. Potential adverse effects of coffee bioactive amines to human health. In 
Coffee: Chemistry, Quality, and Health Implications (Ed.: Farah, A.). Royal Society of Chemistry, 
London, UK. In press.
Gniechwitz, D., Brueckel, B., Reichardt, N., Blaut, M., Steinhart, H. and Bunzel, M. 2007. Coffee dietary 
fiber contents and structural characteristics as influenced by coffee type and technological and 
brewing procedures. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55, 11027–34.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
27
Gniechwitz, D., Reichardt, N., Ralph, J., Blaut, M., Steinhart, H.and Bunzel, M., 2008. Isolation and 
characterisation of a coffee melanoidin fraction. Journal of the Science of Food Agriculture 88, 
2153–60.
Goldstein, E. R., Ziegenfuss, T., Kalman, D., Kreider, R., Campbell, B., Wilborn, C., Taylor, L., Willoughby, 
D., Stout, J., Graves, B. S., Wildman, R., Ivy, J. L., Spano, M., Smith, S. E. and Antonio, J., 2010. 
International society of sports nutrition position stand: Caffeine and performance. Journal of the 
International Society of Sports Nutrition 7, 5.
Grembecka, M., Malinowska, E. and Szefer, P., 2007. Differentiation of market coffee and its infusions 
in view of their mineral composition. Science of the Total Environment 383, 59–69.
Gross, G., Jaccaud, E. and Hugget, A.C., 1997. Analysis of the content of the diterpenes cafestol and 
kahweol in coffee brews. Food and Chemical Toxicology 35, 547–54.
Health Canada, 2011. Information for Parents on Caffeine in Energy Drinks.www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/
securit/addit/caf/faq-eng.php, Accessed January 2017.
Hedden, T. and Gabrieli, J. D. E., 2004. Insights into the ageing mind: A view from cognitive 
neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5, 87–97.
Higdon, J. V. and Frei, B., 2006. Coffee and health: A review of recent human research. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 46, 101–23.
Hirakawa, N., Okauchi, R., Miura, Y. and Yagasaki, K., 2005. Anti-invasive activity of niacin and 
trigonelline against cancer cells. Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry 69(3), 653–8.
Hogervost, E., Bandelow, S., Schmitt, J., Jentjens, R., Oliveira, M., Allgrove, J., Carter, T. and Gleeson, 
M., 2008. Caffeine improves physical and cognitive performance during exhaustive exercise. 
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 40, 1841–51.
Hong, B. N., Yi, T. H., Park, R., Kim, S. Y. and Kang, T. H., 2008. Coffee improves auditory neuropathy 
in diabetic mice. Neuroscience Letters 441(3), 302–6.
Huang, Z., Urade, Y. and Hayaishi, O., 2011. The role of adenosine in the regulation of sleep. Current 
Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 11, 1047–57.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), 2010. Some non-heterocyclic polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons and some related exposures. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Ris 1997; USDA 
National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, release 28, 2015 any Maryland, USA
International Coffee Organization, 2014. World coffee trade (1923–2013): A review of the markets, 
challenges and opportunities facing the sector. 112thSession.http://www.ico.org/news/icc-111-
5-r1e-world-coffee-outlook.pdf
International Diabetes Federation (IDF), 2012. Clinical Guidelines Task Force Global Guideline for 
Type 2 Diabetes.
International Diabetes Federation (IDF), 2015. Diabetes Atlas, 5th Ed. Brussels, Belgium.
Islami, F., Boffetta, P., Ren, J. S., Pedoeim, L., Khatib, D. and Kamangar, F., 2009. High-temperature 
beverages and foods and esophageal cancer risk – A systematic review. International Journal of 
Cancer 125(3), 491–524.
Jee, S. H., He, J., Appel, L. J., Whelton, P. K., Suh, I. and Klag, M. J., 2001. Coffee consumption 
and serum lipids: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. American Journal of 
Epidemiology 153, 353–62.
Jenkins, N. T., Trilk, J. L., Singhal, A., O’Connor, P. J. and Cureton, K. J., 2008. Ergogenic effects of low 
doses of caffeine on cycling performance. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise 
Metabolism 18(3), 328–42.
Ji L., Jiang, P., Lu, B., Sheng, Y., Wang, X. and Wang, Z., 2013. Chlorogenic acid, a dietary polyphenol, 
protects acetaminophen-induced liver injury and its mechanism. Journal of Nutrition and 
Biochemistry 24(11), 1911–19.
Jurkowska, R. Z., Jurkowski, T. P. and Jeltsch, A., 2011. Structure and function of mammalian DNA 
methyltransferases. European Journal of Chemical Biology 12, 206–22.
Kalaska, B., Piotrowski, L., Leszczynska, A., Michalowsk, B., Kramkowski, K., Kaminski, T., Adamus, 
J., Marcinek A., Gebicki, J., Mogielnicki A. and Buczko, W., 2014. Antithrombotic effects of 

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
28
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
pyridinium compounds formed from trigonelline upon coffee roasting. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 62(13), 2853–60.
Kasai H., Fukada, S., Yamaizumi, Z., Sugie, S. and Mori, H. 2000. Action of chlorogenic acid in 
vegetables and fruits as an inhibitor of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine formation in vitro and in a rat 
carcinogenesis model. Food and Chemical Toxicology 38, 467–71.
Kempf, K., Herder, C., Erlund, I., Kolb, H., Martin, S., Carstensen, M., Koenig, W., Sandwall, J., Bidel, 
S., Kuha, S. and Tuomilehto, J., 2010. Effects of coffee consumption on subclinical inflammation 
and other risk factors for type 2 diabetes: A clinical trial. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 
91, 950–7.
Khaw, K. T., Wareham, N., Bingham, S., Welch, A., Luben, R. and Day, N., 2008. Combined impact of 
health behaviours and mortality in men and women: the EPIC-Norfolk prospective population 
study. PLoS Medicine 5(1), e12.
Kuczkowski, K. M., 2009. Caffeine in pregnancy.Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics 280, 695–8.
Kuwana, Y., Shiozaki, S., Kanda, T., Kurokawa, M., Koga, K., Ochi, M., Ikeda, K., Kase, H., Jackson, M. 
J., Smith, L. A., Pearce, R. K. and Jenner, P. G.1999. Antiparkinsonian activity of adenosine A2A 
antagonists in experimental models. Advances in Neurology, 80, 121–3.
Lachenmeier, D.W., 2015. Furan in coffee products: A probabilistic exposure estimation. In:Coffee 
in Health andDiseasePrevention (Ed.:Preedy, V.). Elsevier, 1st edition. New York and London, 
pp. 887–93.
Lakey-Beitia, J., Berrocal, R., Rao, K. S.and Durant, A. A., 2015. Polyphenols as therapeutic molecules 
in Alzheimer’s disease through modulating amyloid pathways. Molecular Neurobiology 51(2), 
466–79.
Lang, R., Wahl, A., Stark, T. and Hofmann, T.2011. Urinary N-methylpyridinium and trigonelline as 
candidate dietary biomarkers of coffee consumption. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 
5(11), 1613–23.
Lang, R., Bardelmeier, I., Weiss, C., Rubach, M., Somoza, V. and Hofmann, T., 2010. Quantitation of 
βN-Alkanoyl-5-hydroxytryptamides in coffee by means of LC-MS/MS-SIDA and assessment of 
their gastric acid secretion potential using the HGT-1 cell assay. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 58(3), 1593–602.
Larsson, S. C. and Wolk, A., 2007. Coffee consumption and risk of liver cancer: A meta-analysis. 
Gastroenterology 132, 1740–5.
Larsson S. C. and Orsini, N., 2011. Coffee consumption and risk of stroke: a dose-response meta-
analysis of prospective studies. American Journal of Epidemiology 174(9), 993–1001
Le Bloch J. L. V., Chetiveaux M., Freuchet B., Magot T., Krempf M., Nguyen P. and Ouguerram K. 2010. 
Nicotinic acid decreases apolipoprotein B100-containing lipoprotein levels by reducing hepatic 
very low density lipoprotein secretion through a possible diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2 inhibition 
in obese dogs. The journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 334, 583–89.
Lecoultre, V., Carrel, G., Egli, L., Binnert, C., Boss, A., MacMillan, E. L., Kreis, R., Boesch, C., Darimont, 
C. and Tappy, L., 2014. Coffee consumption attenuates short-term fructose-induced liver insulin 
resistance in healthy men. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 99(2), 268–75.
Lipworth, L., Sonderman, J. S., Tarone, R. E. and McLaughlin, J., 2012. Review of epidemiologic 
studies of dietary acrylamide intake and the risk of cancer. European Journal of Cancer 
Prevention 21, 375–86.
Loomis, D., Kathryn, Z., Grosse, G. Y., Lauby-Secretan, B., El Ghissassi, F., Bouvard, V.,et al. 2016. 
Carcinogenicity of drinking coffee, mate, and very hot beverages.The Lancet Oncology 
17(7),877–8.
Lopez-Garcia, E., Rodriguez-Artalejo, F., Rexrode, K. M., Logroscino, G., Hu, F. B. and van Dam, R. M., 
2009. Coffee consumption and risk of stroke in women. Circulation 119(8),1116–23.
Ludwig, I. A., Clifford, M. N., Lean, M. E. J., Ashihara, H. and Crozier, A., 2014. Coffee: Biochemistry 
and potential impact on health.Food and Function 5, 1695–717.
Machado, S. R., Parise, E. R. and Carvalho, L., 2014. Coffee has hepatoprotective benefits in Brazilian 
patients with chronic hepatitis C even in lower daily consumption than in American and European 
populations. Brazilian Journal of Infectious Disease 18(2), 170–6.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
29
Macrae, R., 1985. Nitrogenous compounds. In: Coffee. Volume 1 Chemistry, 1st Ed. (Ed.:Clarke, R. 
J.and Macrae, R.). Elsevier, London and New York, p.115.
Malerba, S., Turati, F., Galeone, C., Pelucchi, C., Verga, F., La Vecchia, C. and Tavani, A., 2013. A meta-
analysis of prospective studies of coffee consumption and mortality for all causes, cancers and 
cardiovascular diseases.European Journal of Epidemiology 28(7), 527–39.
Moreira, A., Coimbra, M., Nunes, F. M., Passos, C. P., Santos, S. A., Silvestre, A. J., Silva, A., Rangel, 
M.and Domingues, M. R. M., 2015. Chlorogenic acid-arabinose hybrid domains in coffee 
melanoidins: Evidences from a model system. Food Chemistry 185, 135–44.
Moura-Nunes, N., Perrone, D., Farah, A. and Donangelo, C., 2009. The increase in human plasma 
antioxidant capacity after acute coffee intake is not associated with endogenous non-enzymatic 
antioxidant components. International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 60(supp 6), 
173–81.
Mucci, L. A. and Adami, H. O., 2009. The Plight of the Potato: Is dietary acrylamide a risk factor for 
human cancer?Journal of National Cancer Institute 101(9), 618–21.
Navarini, L., Colomban, S., Caprioli, G.and Sagratini, G., 2017. Isoflavones, Lignans and other minor 
polyphenols. In:Coffee: Chemistry, Quality and Health Implications (Ed. Farah, A.). Royal Society 
of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Nathan, J., Panjwani, S., Mohan, V., Joshi, V. and Thakurdesai, P. A., 2014. Efficacy and safety of 
standardized extract of Trigonella foenum-graecum L seeds in an adjuvant to L-Dopa in the 
management of patients with Parkinson’s disease. Phytotherapy Research 28(2), 172–8.
Nawrot, P., Jordan, S., Eastwood, J., Rotstein, J, Hugenholtz, A. and Feeley, M., 2003. Effects of 
caffeine on human health. Food Additives and Contaminants 20, 1–30.
Nehlig A. and Debry, G., 1994. Consequences on the newborn of chronic maternal consumption of 
coffee during gestation and lactation: A review. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 
13, 6–21.
Nehlig, A., 2010. Is caffeine a cognitive enhancer? Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20(S1), 85–94.
Nkondjock, A., 2012. Coffee and cancers. In:Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention 
(Ed.: Chu, Y.-F.). 1st edition, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp. 293–306.
Nunes F. M., Coimbra M. A., Duarte A. C., and Delgadillo I., 1997. Foamability, foam stability, and 
chemical composition of espresso coffee as affected by the degree of roast, J. Agric. Food 
Chem., 45 (8), 3238–43.
Oboh, G., Agunloye, O. M., Akinyemi, A. J., Ademiluyi, A. O. and Adefegha, S. A., 2013. 
Comparative study on the inhibitory effect of caffeic and chlorogenic acids on key enzymes 
linked to Alzheimer’s disease and some pro-oxidant induced oxidative stress in rats’ brain-in 
vitro. Neurochemistry Research 38(2), 413–19.
Obuleso, M., Dowlathabad, M. R. and Bramhachari, P. V., 2011. Carotenoids and Alzheimer’s Disease: 
An insight into therapeutic role of retinoids in animal models. Neurochemistry International 
59(5), 535–41.
O’Connor, P. J., Motl, R. W., Broglio, S. P. and Ely, M. R., 2004. Dose-dependent effect of caffeine on 
reducing leg muscle pain during cycling exercise is unrelated to systolic blood pressure. Pain 
109, 291–8.
Oliveira, M., Casal, S., Morais, S., Alves, C., Dias, F., Ramos, S., Mendes, E., Delerue-Matos, C. and 
Oliveira, B. P. P., 2012. Intra- and interspecific mineral composition variability of commercial 
coffees and coffee substitutes. Contribution to mineral intake. Food Chemistry 130, 702–9.
Oliveira, M., Ramos, S., Delerue-Matos, C. and Morais S, 2015. Espresso beverages of pure origin 
coffee: Mineral characterization, contribution for mineral intake and geographical discrimination. 
Food Chemistry 177, 330–8.
Olson, C. A., Thornton, J.  A.,  Adam, G. E. and Lieberman, H. R.,  2010. Effects of 2 adenosine antagonists, 
quercetin and cafeïne, on vigilance and mood. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 30(5), 
573–8.
Passos, C. P., Cepeda, M. R., Ferreira, S. S., Nunes, F. M., Evtuguin, D. V., Madureira, P., Vilanova, 
M.and Coimbra, M. A., 2014. Influence of molecular weight on in vitro immunostimulatory 
properties of instant coffee. Food Chemistry 161, 60–6.

Nutritional and health effects of coffee
30
© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Petraco, M., 2005. The cup. In: Espresso Coffee: The Science of Quality, 2nd edition (Eds: Illy, A.and 
Viani, R.). Elsevier Academic Press, Italy, pp. 290–8.
Quan H.Y., Kim D.Y., and Chung S.H, 2013. Caffeine attenuates lipid accumulation via activation of 
AMP-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in HepG2 cells BMB Reports 46(4), 207–12.
Ramassamy, C., 2006. Emerging role of polyphenolic compounds in the treatment of neurodegenerative 
diseases: A review of their intracellular targets. European Journal of Pharmacology 545, 51–64.
Ramos, S., 2008. Cancer chemoprevention and chemotherapy: Dietary polyphenols and signaling 
pathways. Molecular Nutrition and Food Research, 52, 507–26.
Rebello, S.A. and Van Dam, R., 2013. Coffee consumption and cardiovascular health: Getting to the 
heart of the matter. Current Cardiology Reports 15(10), 403–5.
Riedel, A., Hochkogler C. M., Lang, R., Bytof, G., Lantz, I., Hofmann, T. and Somoza, V., 2014. 
N-methylpyridinium, a degradation product of trigonelline upon coffee roasting, stimulates 
respiratory activity and promotes glucose utilization in HepG2 cells. Food &Function 5(3):454–62.
Rios, J. L., Francini, F. and Schinella, G. R., 2015. Natural products for the treatment of Type 2 diabete 
mellitus. Planta Medica 81(12–13), 975–94.
Ritchie, K., Carriere, I., de Mendonca, A., Portet, F., Dartigues, J. F., Rouaud, O., Barberger-Gateau, 
P. and Ancelin, M. L., 2007. The neuroprotective effects of caffeine. A prospective population 
study. Neurology 69, 536–45.
Rodrigues, D.A.C.and Casal, S., 2017. β-Carbolines. In: Coffee, Chemistry, Quality and Health 
Implications (Ed.: Farah, A.). Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In Press.
Rosso, A., Mossey, J. and Lippa, C. F., 2008. Review: Caffeine: Neuroprotective functions in cognition and 
alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias 23(5), 417–22.
Rubach M., Lang R., Bytof G., Stiebitz H., Lantz I., Hofmann T. and Somoza V. 2014. A dark brown 
roast coffee blend is less effective at stimulating gastric acid secretion in healthy volunteers 
compared to a medium roast market blend. Mol Nutr Food Res., 58(6), 1370–3.
Rufián-Henares, J.A. and Morales, F., 2007. Functional Properties of melanoidins: In vitro antioxidant, 
antimicrobial and antihypertensive activities. Food Research International, 40(8), 995–1002.
Ryan, L., Hatfield, C. and Hofstetter, M., 2002. Caffeine reduces time-of-day effects on memory 
performance in older adults. Psychological Science, 13(1), 68–71.
Saab, S., Mallam, D., Cox, G.A. and Tong, M.J., 2014. Impact of coffee on liver diseases: A systematic 
review. Liver International, 34(4), 495–504.
Sales, A., Miguel, M. A. and Farah, A., 2017. Potential prebiotic effect of coffee. In Coffee: Chemistry 
Quality and Health Implications (Ed.: Farah, A.). Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Santos, M. D., Almeida, M. C., Lopes, N. P. and Souza, G. E. P. 2006, Evaluation of the anti-
inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activities of the natural polyphenol chlorogenic acid. 
Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 29, 2236–40.
Santos, C., Costa, J., Santos, J., Vaz-Carneiro, A. and Lunet, N., 2010. Caffeine intake and dementia: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20(S1), 187–204.
Santos, I. S., Matijasevich, A. and Domingues, M.R., 2012. Maternal caffeine consumption and infant 
nighttime waking: Prospective cohort study. Pediatrics 129, 860–8.
Satel, S., 2006. Is caffeine addictive? – a review of the literature. American Journal of Drug and 
Alcohol Abuse 32 (4), 493–502.
Sengpiel. V., Elind, E., Bacelis, J., Nilsson, S., Grove, J., Myhre, R., Haugen, M., Meltzer, H. M., 
Alexander, T., Jacobsson, B. and Brantsaeter, A. L., 2013. Maternal caffeine intake during 
pregnancy is associated with birth weight but not with gestational length: results from a large 
prospective observational cohort study. BioMed Central Medicine 11, 42–60.
Smith, A., Sutherland, D. and Christopher, G., 2005. Effects of repeated doses of caffeïne and mood 
and performance of alert and fatigued volunteers. Journal of Psychopharmacology 19(6), 620–6.
Smith, R. F., 1987. A History of coffee. In:Coffee: Botany, Biochemistry and Production of Beans and 
Beverage (Clifford, M. N.and Wilson, K. C. (Eds)). 1st edition, Croom Helm, Ney York, pp. 1–12.
Somoza V., Lindenmeier M., Wenzel E., Frank O., Erbersdobler H. F., and Hofmann T. (2003). Activity-
guided identification of a chemopreventive compound in coffee beverage using in vitro and in 
vivo techniques. J. Agric. Food Chem., 51 (23), 6861–9.

© Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing Limited, 2018. All rights reserved.
Nutritional and health effects of coffee
31
Speer, K. and Kölling-Speer, I.2017. Lipids. In: Coffee: Chemistry, Quality, and Health Implications 
(Ed.: Farah, A.).Royal Society of Chemistry, London, UK. In press.
Spriet, L. L. and Gibala, M. J., 2004. Nutritional strategies to influence adaptations to training.Journal 
of Sports Sciences 22, 127–41.
Stavchansky, S., Combs, A., Sagraves, R., Delgado, M. and Joshi, A., 1988. Pharmacokinetics 
of caffeine in breast milk and plasma after single oral administration of caffeine to lactating 
mothers. Biopharmaceutics and Drug Disposition 9, 285–99.
Terry, P., Lagergren, J., Wolk, A. and Nyren, O., 2000. Reflux-inducing dietary factors and risk of 
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastric cardia. Nutrition and Cancer 38(2), 186–91.
Tohda, C., Kuboyama, T. and Komatsu, K., 2005. Search for natural products related to regeneration 
of the neuronal network. Neurosignals 14(1–2), 34–45.
Torres, T.  and  Farah, A., 2016. Coffee, maté, açaí and beans are the main contributors to the 
antioxidant capacity of Brazilian’s diet. European Journal of Nutrition March 14. 56(4):1523–33. 
doi:10.1007/s00394-016-1198-9.
Trugo, L. C., 1985. Carbohydrates. In: Coffee. Volume 1 Chemistry, 1st Ed. (Ed.: Clarke, R. J.and 
Macare, R.).Elsevier, London and New York, p.83.
Ukers, W. H., 1935. All About Coffee, 2nd Ed. Tea and Coffee Trade Journal Co., New York.
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 2015. USDA Scientific Report of the Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committee.
Urgert, R., van der Weg, G., Kosmeijer-Schuil, T. G., van de Bovenkamp, P., Hovenier, R. and Katan, M. 
B., 1995. Levels of the cholesterol-elevating diterpenes cafestol and kahweol in various coffee 
brews.Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 43(8), 2167–72.
Urgert, R. and Katan, M. B., 1997. The cholesterol-raising factor from coffee beans. Annual Review of 
Nutrition 17, 305–24.
USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference (Release 28, released September 2015, slightly 
revised May 2016) United States Department of Agriculture, https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/.
USDA National Nutrient Database, 2017. United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research 
Service, USDA Food Composition Databases, https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/, Accessed in 
February 13 2017.
van Boxtel, M. P. J. and Schmitt, J. A. J., 2004. Age related changes in the effects of caffeine on 
memory and cognitive performance. In: Coffee, Tea, Chocolate and the Brain (Ed.: Nehlig, 
A.).CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 85–97.
van Dijk A.E., Olthof, M. R., Meeuse, J. C., Seebus, E., Heine, R. J. and van Dam, R. M., 2009. 
Acute effects of decaffeinated coffee and the major coffee components chlorogenic acid and 
trigonelline on glucose tolerance.Diabetes Care 32, 1023–5.
Vitaglione, P., Fogliano, V. and Pellegrini, N., 2012. Coffee, colon function and colorectal cancer. Food 
and Function 3, 916–22.
Waite, M., 2015. Treatment for Alzheimer’s disease: Has anything changed? Australian Prescriber 38, 60–3.
Wang W., Basinger A., Neese R. A., Shane B., Myong S. A., Christiansen M. and Hellerstein M. K. 
2001. Am J Effect of nicotinic acid administration on hepatic very low density lipoprotein-
triglyceride production. Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 280, 3, E540–7.
WHO/FAO (World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), 
2002. Human vitamin and mineral requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, 
Bangkok, Thailand.FAO, Rome. http://www.fao.org/docrep/004/y2809e/y2809e00.htm
WHO 2017, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/accessed in January 2017.
Yamamoto, T., Yoshizawa, K., Kubo, S., Emoto, Y., Hara, K., Waters, B., Umehara, T., Murase, T. and 
Ikematsu, K., 2015. Autopsy report for a caffeine intoxication case and review of the current 
literature. Journal of Toxicologic Pathology 1, 33–6.
Yoshinari, O. and Igarashi, K., 2010. Anti-diabetic effect of trigonelline and nicotinic acid, on KK-Ay 
mice. Current Medicinal Chemistry 17(20), 2196–202.
Youngberg, M. R., Karpov, I. O., Begley, A., Pollock, B. G. and Buysse, D. J., 2011. Clinical and 
physiological correlates of caffeine and caffeine metabolites in primary insomnia. Journal of 
Clinical Sleep Medicine 7, 196–203.

