Citation: Fernández-Tomé, S. Role of
Food Digestion and Digestive System
in the Nutritional, Functional and
Health Properties of Food Bioactives.
Nutrients 2024, 16, 712. https://
doi.org/10.3390/nu16050712
Received: 16 February 2024
Accepted: 23 February 2024
Published: 29 February 2024
Copyright:
© 2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
nutrients
Editorial
Role of Food Digestion and Digestive System in the Nutritional,
Functional and Health Properties of Food Bioactives
Samuel Fernández-Tomé
Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty of Pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid (UCM),
Plaza Ramón y Cajal s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain; sfernandeztome@ucm.es
The impact of food components on the human digestive system is an important area
of research in the fields of nutrition and food science. Food is composed of a mix of
chemical components that will be processed by the digestive system to release, absorb,
and metabolize the nutrients. The composition and structure of food play a significant
role in its nutritional and functional properties, making it necessary to understand the
modifications and mechanisms occurring during food digestion to better comprehend
the potential health benefits of food bioactives. Furthermore, the human gastrointestinal
tract is continually exposed to a varied range of food compounds in the gut lumen as
they are processed following oral intake and then transported across the intestinal barrier.
Food compounds may undergo several changes in the digestive system; hence, it is a real
challenge for food scientists to understand their health implications within and beyond the
gastrointestinal tract. Researchers have thus utilized some in vitro models in an attempt to
simulate the gastrointestinal digestion process and study the interaction between foods
and the digestive system, but the complexity of this interface require further investigation
to advance our understanding of food digestion, bioaccessibility, and bioavailability, along
with the influence of gut microbiota. The field of functional foods aims to uncover these
complexities on the path towards enhancing our knowledge on the impact of food bioactives
on human health and disease.
This Special Issue of the journal Nutrients includes eight outstanding papers describing
examples of the new research trends on the interplay between the following key elements
in nutrition and food science research: (i) the physiology of the digestive system and gas-
trointestinal digestion of foods; (ii) the analysis of the food matrix and composition during
digestion; (iii) the nutritional, functional, and biological properties of food bioactives; and
(iv) the health impact of the modulation of digestive functions through dietary substances.
The Special Issue begins with a group of research articles investigating different aspects
related to the digestibility of food proteins (Contributions 1–4). The study of Benede et al.
(Contribution 1) aimed at evaluating the susceptibility to digestion of transglutaminase-
mediated crosslinked skim milk and its two main protein fractions, namely casein and
whey protein, as well as their allergenic potential. After treatment with transglutaminase,
the human IgE binding capacity of sera from milk-allergic patients to whey protein was
increased but reduced in the case of skim milk and casein. Despite no effects being provoked
in mast cell degranulation, in comparison to native proteins, the cross-linking of skim milk
and casein induced a lower release of Th2 cytokines from the splenocytes of sensitized mice.
Moreover, all transglutaminase-treated milk samples were more resistant to simulated
digestion, and, consequently, the binding to human IgE of their digests was increased.
This fact questioned the use of transglutaminase-crosslinking to obtain hypoallergenic
products for cow’s milk allergic patients and highlighted the necessity to evaluate the
whole food matrix composed of diverse compounds with different resistance to processing
and gastrointestinal digestion and, therefore, showing different interactions with gut
mucosa and allergenicity mediators [1,2].
Nutrients 2024, 16, 712. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu16050712
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients

Nutrients 2024, 16, 712
2 of 5
Nowadays, it is a well-known fact that the COST Action INFOGEST was established
as an international network with the final aim of “Improving health properties of food by
sharing our knowledge on the digestive process”. It has been working on food digestion for
several years and currently gathers more than 440 researchers from more than 40 countries
worldwide. Hence, the network reached a consensus to harmonize the in vitro static systems
that simulate the digestive processes by defining key parameters and conditions, hence
allowing the publication of the standardized static in vitro digestion method suitable
for food developed by Minekus et al. [3]. Noteworthy, the methodology achieved an
extraordinary impact in the scientific community, currently reaching over 3300 citations
since its origin from multiple research institutions worldwide, and it has been amended
in an updated publication of the improved digestion protocol (INFOGEST 2.0) [4]. In this
Special Issue, the study of Correa et al. (Contribution 2) applied this simulated digestion
method to evaluate the release of essential amino acids and bioactive peptides from the
legume Erythrina edulis (chachafruto) proteins during gastrointestinal digestion. Legume-
derived food peptides have been shown in the literature to display mostly antihypertensive,
antimicrobial, antidiabetic, or antiproliferative properties [5]. In this specific study on
chachafruto proteins, low molecular weight peptides released after protein digestion were
proved to exert antioxidant activity through radical scavenging capacities, whereas high
molecular weight peptides prompted both immune activation in RAW 264.7 macrophages
and cell protection against LPS challenge.
In the study of Jiménez-Muñoz et al. (Contribution 3), a semi-dynamic INFOGEST-
based digestion system provided useful information about optimal gastrointestinal con-
ditions for protein bioaccessibility, but also about the mechanistic understanding of how
food matrix may influence the behavior of proteins during gastric and intestinal digestion.
Hence, the study made use of confocal laser scanning microscopy, and protein breakdown
and free amino acid analyses to demonstrate how the differences in the structure of four
isocaloric matrices (suspension, gel, foam, and heat-set foam) of a commercial potato
protein ingredient impact its digestibility and therefore its protein quality [6]. A greater
structural complexity was found to lead to more delayed gastric emptying. In addition to a
slower gastric emptying rate, the heat-treated samples revealed a higher degree of hydrol-
ysis and lower trypsin inhibitory activity than the non-heat-treated samples. Regarding
the distribution of the bioaccessible peptides formed, similar trends were found between
samples at different gastric and intestinal times, apart from the heat-set foam matrix.
Following this line of research, the study of Jiménez-Barrios et al. (Contribution 4)
characterized in detail the peptidome profile of duodenal digests from pigs as a recognized
model of human digestion after oral administration of two dairy samples: micellar casein
and a previously described casein hydrolysate [7]. When animals received micellar casein,
a slower transit of nitrogen to the duodenum was observed, and the duodenal digests con-
tained a wider range of peptide sizes as well as a higher number of sequences longer than
five amino acids. Likewise, noticeable differences were revealed between the sequences
identified in casein and hydrolysate digests, including the presence of different opioid
peptides. Furthermore, the amino acid availability was quantified in plasma and evidenced
a more rapid absorption in the hydrolysate group, with several branched-chain and other
hydrophobic amino acids peaking at shorter times in comparison to the casein-fed animals.
Specifically focused on food proteins (Contributions 1–4), these investigations rep-
resent not only a key tool to validate in vitro digestion protocols but also allow for the
obtention of valuable data that could be applied to physiological and metabolic research
studies [8,9]. The fate of food proteins during gastrointestinal digestion and the biological
effects of their corresponding released peptides are thus highlighted as an area of intense
research in the field of functional foods [10,11]. Hence, food-derived peptides with bio-
logical properties at the gastrointestinal level, such as antioxidant and antimicrobial [12],
modulation of inflammation and immune response [13], chemoprevention of malignant
diseases [14], opioid activity [15], or anti-diabetic effects [16], among others, have been
reported in various investigations.

Nutrients 2024, 16, 712
3 of 5
Food researchers have also utilized gastrointestinal digestion protocols to evaluate
the bioaccessibility and bioavailability of nutrients and bioactive compounds [17]. In
this respect, the study of Fărcas, et al. (Contribution 5) used brewers’ spent grain, the
main by-product obtained from the industrial brewing process, as a sustainable source of
minerals and B group vitamins and evaluated its bioaccessibility. The study found that
micro-minerals such as Fe, Cu, Zn, Cr, Mn, Ni, Ba, and Sr and macro-minerals such as Ca,
Mg, Na, K, and B group vitamins (B1, B3, B6, and B12) presented different bioaccessibility
values following the INFOGEST digestion methodology. Indeed, these authors suggested
that the diverse sample types (including different percentages of malted cereals), their
chemical composition (protein, fiber, bound polypeptide, and polysaccharide contents),
along with the gastrointestinal digestion conditions, were the main factors that finally
affected the bioaccessibility values of the assessed minerals and B vitamins.
Regarding bioactive compounds, proanthocyanidins are a type of polyphenol with
previously described preventive properties against obesity alterations [18]. In the study of
Yu et al. (Contribution 6), persimmon proanthocyanidins significantly reduced the body
weight of high-fat-diet-fed C57BL/6J mice, with different improvements in insulin resis-
tance, lipid accumulation, as well as gut microbiota composition and diversity depending
on their degrees of polymerization. Furthermore, in comparison with the oligomeric proan-
thocyanidins, polymeric proanthocyanidins exhibited strong inhibition over the activity of
the digestive enzymes α-amylase and pancreatic lipase. In this line of research, previous
studies had shown encouraging results for the inhibition of lipid digestion enzymes using
bioactive compounds derived from black tea brew and grape seed powder [19,20]. Hence,
the study of Tormási and Abrankó (Contribution 7) examined the lipolysis inhibitory effect
of both ingredients when co-digested with two selected real foods with different lipid
profiles as substrate tests (cream and baked beef). To that purpose, this study also applied
the INFOGEST digestion protocol. The authors found that the characteristics of the dietary
fat source can influence the lipolysis process, as both samples similarly decreased the
lipolysis of the cream sample, but they were not able to influence the digestibility of beef fat,
showing a simpler fatty acid profile in comparison with the diverse fatty acid composition
of milk fat. Moreover, it was suggested that the lipolysis inhibitory effect of black tea brew
and grape seed powder primarily affected the lipolysis of short- and medium-chain fatty
acids because of the different preference of pancreatic lipase, in opposition to gastric lipase,
to digest this type of triacylglycerol, which is further enhanced as a result of co-digestion
with the evaluated ingredients.
Lastly, the Special Issue concludes with a review by Paterson et al. (Contribution 8) that
summarizes the novel trends in microalgae research. This comprehensive review provides
an updated discussion on the nutritional value (protein and amino acids, lipids and fatty
acids, carbohydrates, minerals, vitamins, carotenoids, and phenolic compounds), biological
effects (antioxidant, antimicrobial, and anticarcinogenic), as well as the digestibility of two
microalgae genera, Tetraselmis and Nannochloropsis, as the basis to support their alternative
exploitation as ingredients with health benefits and, consequently, with potential for the
development of novel functional foods.
Acknowledgments: The invited authors are acknowledged for their interesting and insightful contributions.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
List of Contributions
1.
Benedé, S.; Martínez-Blanco, M.; López-Fandiño, R.; Molina, E. IgE-Binding and Immunostimu-
lating Properties of Enzymatic Crosslinked Milk Proteins as Influenced by Food Matrix and
Digestibility. Nutrients 2022, 14, 4584. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14214584.
2.
Correa, J.L.; Zapata, J.E.; Hernández-Ledesma, B. Release of Bioactive Peptides from Erythrina
edulis (Chachafruto) Proteins under Simulated Gastrointestinal Digestion. Nutrients 2022, 14, 5256.
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14245256.

Nutrients 2024, 16, 712
4 of 5
3.
Jiménez-Munoz, L.; Tsochatzis, E.D.; Corredig, M. Impact of the Structural Modifications of
Potato Protein in the Digestibility Process under Semi-Dynamic Simulated Human Gastroin-
testinal In Vitro System. Nutrients 2022, 14, 2505. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14122505.
4.
Jiménez-Barrios, P.; Sánchez-Rivera, L.; Martínez-Maqueda, D.; Le Gouar, Y.; Dupont, D.;
Miralles, B.; Recio, I. Peptidomic Characterization and Amino Acid Availability after Intake of
Casein vs. a Casein Hydrolysate in a Pig Model. Nutrients 2023, 15, 1065. https://doi.org/10.3
390/nu15051065
5.
Fărcas,, A.C.; Socaci, S.A.; Chis,, M.S.; Martínez-Monzó, J.; García-Segovia, P.; Becze, A.; Török,
A.I.; Cadar, O.; Coldea, T.E.; Igual, M. In Vitro Digestibility of Minerals and B Group Vitamins
from Different Brewers’ Spent Grains. Nutrients 2022, 14, 3512. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu141
73512.
6.
Yu, Y.; Chen, P.; Li, X.; Shen, S.; Li, K. Persimmon Proanthocyanidins with Different Degrees
of Polymerization Possess Distinct Activities in Models of High Fat Diet Induced Obesity.
Nutrients 2022, 14, 3718. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14183718.
7.
Tormási, J.; Abrankó, L. Impact of Grape Seed Powder and Black Tea Brew on Lipid Digestion—An
In Vitro Co-Digestion Study with Real Foods. Nutrients 2023, 15, 2395. https://doi.org/10.339
0/nu15102395.
8.
Paterson, S.; Gómez-Cortés, P.; de la Fuente, M.A.; Hernández-Ledesma, B. Bioactivity and
Digestibility of Microalgae Tetraselmis sp. and Nannochloropsis sp. as Basis of Their Potential as
Novel Functional Foods. Nutrients 2023, 15, 477. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15020477.
References
1.
Verhoeckx, K.C.M.; Vissers, Y.M.; Baumert, J.L.; Faludi, R.; Feys, M.; Flanagan, S.; Herouet-Guicheney, C.; Holzhauser, T.;
Shimojo, R.; van der Bolt, N.; et al. Food processing and allergenicity. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2015, 80, 223–240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Verhoeckx, K.; Bøgh, K.L.; Dupont, D.; Egger, L.; Gadermaier, G.; Larré, C.; Mackie, A.; Menard, O.; Adel-Patient, K.;
Picariello, G.; et al. The relevance of a digestibility evaluation in the allergenicity risk assessment of novel proteins. Opin-
ion of a joint initiative of COST action ImpARAS and COST action INFOGEST. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2019, 129, 405–423. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3.
Minekus, M.; Alminger, M.; Alvito, P.; Ballance, S.; Bohn, T.; Bourlieu, C.; Carrière, F.; Boutrou, R.; Corredig, M.; Dupont, D.; et al.
A standardised static in vitro digestion method suitable for food-an international consensus. Food Funct. 2014, 5, 1113–1124.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Brodkorb, A.; Egger, L.; Alminger, M.; Alvito, P.; Assunção, R.; Ballance, S.; Bohn, T.; Bourlieu-Lacanal, C.; Boutrou, R.;
Carrière, F.; et al. INFOGEST static in vitro simulation of gastrointestinal food digestion. Nat. Protoc. 2019, 14, 991–1014.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Luna-Vital, D.; de Mejía, E.G. Peptides from Legumes with Antigastrointestinal Cancer Potential: Current Evidence for Their
Molecular Mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2018, 20, 13–18. [CrossRef]
6.
Herreman, L.; Nommensen, P.; Pennings, B.; Laus, M.C. Comprehensive overview of the quality of plant-and animal sourced
proteins based on the digestible indispensable amino acid score. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 8, 5379–5391. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Contreras, M.d.M.; Sevilla, M.A.; Monroy-Ruiz, J.; Amigo, L.; Gómez-Sala, B.; Molina, E.; Ramos, M.; Recio, I. Food-Grade
Production of an Antihypertensive Casein Hydrolysate and Resistance of Active Peptides to Drying and Storage. Int. Dairy J.
2011, 21, 470–476. [CrossRef]
8.
Boutrou, R.; Gaudichon, C.; Dupont, D.; Jardin, J.; Airinei, G.; Marsset-Baglieri, A.; Benamouzig, R.; Tomé, D.; Leonil, J. Sequential
Release of Milk Protein Derived Bioactive Peptides in the Jejunum in Healthy Humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 97, 1314–1323.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Egger, L.; Schlegel, P.; Baumann, C.; Stoffers, H.; Guggisberg, D.; Brügger, C.; Dürr, D.; Stoll, P.; Vergères, G.; Portmann, R.
Physiological Comparability of the Harmonized INFOGEST In Vitro Digestion Method to In Vivo Pig Digestion. Food Res. Int.
2017, 102, 567–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Fernández-Tomé, S.; Hernández-Ledesma, B. Gastrointestinal digestion of food proteins under the effects of released bioactive
peptides on digestive health. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2020, 64, 2000401. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Duarte Villas Mishima, M.; Stampini Duarte Martino, H.; Silva Meneguelli, T.; Tako, E. Effect of food derived bioactive peptides
on gut health and inflammatory mediators in vivo: A systematic review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2023, 1–11. [CrossRef]
12.
López-García, G.; Dublan-García, O.; Arizmendi-Cotero, D.; Gómez Oliván, L.M. Antioxidant and antimicrobial peptides derived
from food proteins. Molecules 2022, 27, 1343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Fernández-Tomé, S.; Indiano-Romacho, P.; Mora-Gutiérrez, I.; Pérez-Rodríguez, L.; Ortega Moreno, L.; Marin, A.C.;
Baldán-Martín, M.; Moreno-Monteagudo, J.A.; Santander, C.; Chaparro, M.; et al. Lunasin peptide is a modulator of the immune
response in the human gastrointestinal tract. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2021, 65, 2001034. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Díaz-Gómez, J.L.; Castorena-Torres, F.; Preciado-Ortiz, R.E.; García-Lara, S. Anti-cancer activity of maize bioactive peptides.
Front. Chem. 2017, 5, 44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2024, 16, 712
5 of 5
15.
Liu, Z.; Udenigwe, C.C. Role of food-derived opioid peptides in the central nervous and gastrointestinal systems. J. Food Biochem.
2019, 43, e12629. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Elam, E.; Feng, J.; Lv, Y.M.; Ni, Z.J.; Sun, P.; Thakur, K.; Zhang, J.G.; Ma, Y.L.; Wei, Z.J. Recent advances on bioactive food derived
anti-diabetic hydrolysates and peptides from natural resources. J. Funct. Foods 2021, 86, 104674. [CrossRef]
17.
Grundy, M.M.; Moughan, P.J.; Wilde, P.J. Bioaccessibility and associated concepts: Need for a consensus. Trends Food Sci. Technol.
2024, 145, 104373. [CrossRef]
18.
Zhu, W.; Oteiza, P.I. Proanthocyanidins at the gastrointestinal tract: Mechanisms involved in their capacity to mitigate obesity-
associated metabolic disorders. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2024, 64, 220–240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Dwibedi, V.; Jain, S.; Singhal, D.; Mittal, A.; Rath, S.K.; Saxena, S. Inhibitory Activities of Grape Bioactive Compounds against
Enzymes Linked with Human Diseases. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2022, 106, 1399–1417. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Chen, T.-Y.; Wang, M.M.C.; Hsieh, S.-K.; Hsieh, M.-H.; Chen, W.-Y.; Tzen, J.T.C. Pancreatic Lipase Inhibition of Strictinin Isolated
from Pu’er Tea (Cammelia sinensis) and Its Anti-Obesity Effects in C57BL6 Mice. J. Funct. Foods 2018, 48, 1–8. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
