nutrients
Review
Potential of Caffeine in Alzheimer’s Disease—A Review of
Experimental Studies
Piotr Londzin *
, Milena Zamora, Beata K ˛akol, Aleksandra Taborek and Joanna Folwarczna


Citation: Londzin, P.; Zamora, M.;
K ˛akol, B.; Taborek, A.; Folwarczna, J.
Potential of Caffeine in Alzheimer’s
Disease—A Review of Experimental
Studies. Nutrients 2021, 13, 537.
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020537
Academic Editor:
Tatsuhiro Hisatsune
Received: 31 December 2020
Accepted: 2 February 2021
Published: 6 February 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences in Sosnowiec, Medical University of Silesia,
Katowice, Jagiello´nska 4, 41-200 Sosnowiec, Poland; milena.zamora95@gmail.com (M.Z.);
beata744@interia.eu (B.K.); taborek.aleksandra@gmail.com (A.T.); jfolwarczna@sum.edu.pl (J.F.)
* Correspondence: plondzin@sum.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-32-364-1540
Abstract: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia leading to progressive
memory loss and cognitive impairment. Considering that pharmacological treatment options for
AD are few and not satisfactory, increasing attention is being paid to dietary components that may
affect the development of the disease. Such a dietary component may be caffeine contained in coffee,
tea or energy drinks. Although epidemiological data suggest that caffeine intake may counteract
the development of cognitive impairment, results of those studies are not conclusive. The aim of the
present study is to review the existing experimental studies on the efﬁcacy of caffeine against AD
and AD-related cognitive impairment, focusing on the proposed protective mechanisms of action. In
conclusion, the reports of studies on experimental AD models generally supported the notion that
caffeine may exert some beneﬁcial effects in AD. However, further studies are necessary to elucidate
the role of caffeine in the effects of its sources on cognition and possibly AD risk.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease; experimental Alzheimer’s disease models; caffeine; coffee
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia, accounting for
50–70% of neurodegenerative dementia cases. AD leads to a progressive loss of memory
and cognitive abilities [1].
It is believed, especially taking into account very limited therapeutic options, that
dietary interventions or nutraceuticals may be promising in the prophylaxis and treatment
of cognitive impairment of ageing, including AD [2–7]. The effects of dietary components
are usually evaluated based on dietary questionnaires, and the results of those studies, as
well as the results of their meta-analyses are often not conclusive. The number of random-
ized controlled trials concerning phytochemicals is low [4]. On the other hand, numerous
experimental studies indicated phytochemicals as potentially useful in the prophylaxis of
AD, including ﬂavonoids, phenolic acids, carotenoids, curcumin, resveratrol, and some
alkaloids (for comprehensive review—see [4,6]). From among those phytochemicals, the
effects of caffeine seem to be the most thoroughly examined and best documented.
Caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) is a purine alkaloid, commonly consumed on a daily basis.
Caffeine is probably the most commonly used psychoactive substance/psychostimulant [8–10].
It is found in coffee (Coffea L.) beans, cola (Cola acuminata (P. Beauv.) Schott and Endl.)
nuts, tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) Kuntze) leaves and yerba mate (Ilex paraguariensis A.St.-
Hil.) leaves, as well as guarana (Paullinia cupana Kunth) seeds and cocoa (Theobroma cacao
L.) beans [4,10]. The main dietary source of caffeine is coffee, tea and yerba mate [11].
Caffeine is also present in soft drinks (cola-type) and energy drinks, used mainly by
younger individuals [8]. The mean caffeine intake varies between countries, however it has
remained stable in adults in the last 10–15 years [12]. According to the recommendations
of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the daily caffeine intake up to 400 mg is
considered safe for healthy adults [13,14].
Nutrients 2021, 13, 537. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13020537
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
2 of 33
Numerous health-promoting activities are attributed to coffee and caffeine. A recent
umbrella review of meta-analyses indicated, among others, beneﬁcial role of coffee in
reducing risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), cardiovascular diseases, some cancers
and Parkinson’s disease [15,16]. The results of epidemiological and experimental studies
suggest also a possible beneﬁcial effect of caffeine in the prevention of AD [17–20]. However,
human studies concerned caffeine contained in the diet and cannot isolate caffeine’s effects
from countless lifestyle choices people make.
Here we would like to focus on the results of experimental studies of caffeine, carried
out in order to evaluate its potential in the prophylaxis and treatment of AD. A literature
search was conducted on the PubMed electronic database. Articles presented in languages
other than English were excluded. Results of all studies on caffeine effects in different AD
experimental models, published until December 2020, and found in the PubMed electronic
database, were referred to in the present review.
2. Caffeine—Main Mechanisms of Action
The mechanism of action of caffeine is complex. Caffeine is a non-selective antagonist
of adenosine receptors (mainly A1 and A2A), demonstrating a structural similarity to adeno-
sine. The blocking of these receptors modulates glutamatergic, cholinergic, dopaminergic,
serotoninergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission [8,21,22]. The blockade of adenosine
receptors is observed in lower concentrations of caffeine (<250 µM) [22]. Moreover, caffeine
is an agonist of ryanodine receptors (RyRs), stimulation of which increases the release
of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum [23,24]. Caffeine is also a non-selective compet-
itive inhibitor of phosphodiesterases (PDEs), the enzymes degrading cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP), which leads to increases in the cell cAMP concentration [8,23].
However, the effect of caffeine through the signaling pathways associated with the stimula-
tion of RyRs and the blocking of PDEs is only possible at higher doses (plasma concentration
>250 µM) [22,23,25]. Caffeine also interferes with γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA)
receptors [24,26,27]. Caffeine protects against cell damage, exerts antioxidant effects, re-
ducing oxidative stress markers [23,28]. Caffeine may exert also anti-inﬂammatory activity,
decreasing proinﬂammatory (C-reactive protein, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-18, tumor
necrosis factor α—TNF-α) and increasing anti-inﬂammatory (IL-10, adiponectin) marker
levels [23,29,30].
3. Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)
AD is characterized by personality disorders, amnesia, dementia and cognitive im-
pairment [31]. Brain atrophy observed in AD results from the synaptic degeneration and
neuronal cell death. Dysfunctions occur mainly in the brain regions that play a major role
in memory and spatial orientation, i.e., in the hippocampus, striatum, cerebral cortex, tha-
lamus and amygdala [32,33]. Besides cognitive dysfunctions, the majority of patients with
AD suffer from behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD). BPSD include
depression, apathy, anxiety, sleep changes, hallucinations, delusions and agitation [34–36].
There are two major forms of AD—familial (or early-onset) and sporadic. Famil-
ial AD (FAD), 5% of AD cases [35,37], is caused by mutations in genes encoding three
proteins—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2) [38].
The cause of the sporadic forms of AD is unknown; the majority of them develop after
65 years of age [39]. The ε-4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) is a risk factor in
the pathogenesis of late-onset of AD, playing an important role in amyloid β (Aβ) brain
metabolism (APOE ε-4 exacerbates deposition of Aβ in the brain and tau-mediated neu-
rodegeneration) [40–42]. Among various risk factors associated with AD, T2D, traumatic
brain injury, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity and metabolic
syndrome have been demonstrated [43,44]. There is a hypothesis that the sporadic type of
AD is triggered by dysfunctional insulin signaling in the brain; it has been proposed that
sporadic AD may be considered the brain type of diabetes [45] or type 3 diabetes [46,47].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
3 of 33
The most popular hypothesis on the pathogenesis of AD is the amyloid hypothesis,
which assumes an important role of Aβ deposits in the form of senile plaques [48,49]. In fact,
the neuropathological hallmarks of AD are the presence of extracellular neuritic plaques,
consisting of deposits of Aβ peptides and intraneuronal neuroﬁbrillary tangles (NFTs) com-
posed of aggregated and often truncated, and hyperphosphorylated tau protein [1,50,51].
Aβ is formed as a result of incorrect fragmentation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP)
processed by β-secretases (β-site amyloid-precursor-protein-cleaving enzyme-1—BACE-1
and BACE-2) and γ-secretases [52]. Senile plaques activate microglial cells and induce
inﬂammation [49,52,53]. In AD, the tau protein uncouples from microtubules, aggre-
gates into tangles and inhibits microtubular transport [50]. Hyperphosphorylation of
tau protein causes dysregulation of the neuronal system and axon damage [52]. Also,
neuroinﬂammation is considered to be involved in the pathogenesis of AD [53]. Proin-
ﬂammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and NO
production leads to dysfunction of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and the inﬂux of immuno-
competent cells [32]. The associated oxidative stress causes lipid and neuronal protein
oxidation [48,52]. Inﬂammation-related biomarkers are present in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid,
peripheral blood and brain in AD patients [49,53,54].
Neurodegenerative disorders in AD lead to decreases in the levels of neurotransmitters.
An important role in the pathogenesis of AD is a reduction of acetylcholine (ACh) content.
The dysfunction of cholinergic system is related to degeneration of the nucleus basalis of
Meynert cholinergic neurons caused by NFTs formation. The presence of NFTs and Aβ
plaques leads to cholinergic synapse loss. Moreover, despite the preservation of postsy-
naptic M1 muscarinic receptors (the level of presynaptic M2 receptors is decreased) in the
cerebral cortex, their functions are impaired. Also, progressive decrease in the number of
nicotinic receptors in the cerebral cortex is observed. Deﬁcits in cholinergic neurotransmis-
sion contribute to the learning, memory and attention impairment [55,56]. Moreover, it has
been demonstrated that interaction between cholinergic and glutamatergic transmission is
involved in Ca2+-dependent neuroprotection [56]. The glutamatergic system is controlled
by various mediators, including adenosine and ACh [56–58]. In AD, there is a decrease
in the number of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors resulting in an imbalance
between synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDA receptors [59,60]. Malfunctioning glutamater-
gic neurons release too much glutamate, which over-stimulates the extrasynaptic NMDA
receptors leading to the neuronal cell death and synaptic loss [59]. Moreover, cholinergic
neuronal loss leads to dopaminergic transmission dysfunction which is correlated with
psychiatric symptoms of AD (BPSD) [55,56]. Also, the loss of noradrenergic neurons in
the locus coeruleus caused by the tau protein accumulation results in the progression of
AD. Noradrenergic receptors (mainly α2 receptor activation or β receptor blockade) are
involved in the Aβ-related neuropathology. Upregulation of adenosine receptors (A1R and
A2AR) is also observed in AD. Activation of adenosine receptors affects synaptic neurotrans-
mission and various neurotransmitters release (ACh, glutamate) [58]. Moreover, it disrupts
learning and memory processes and leads to cognitive disorders [58,61]. Also, dysregulated
signaling by other purinergic receptors may be involved in the pathomechanism of AD.
Activation of P2X7 receptors by high levels of adenosine triphosphate—ATP or its metabo-
lites (Aβ accumulation induces increased release of ATP) leads to neuroinﬂammation, i.e.,
increased level of IL-1, IL-6, IL-18, TNF-α and interferon-γ, and neurodegeneration [62].
Summing up, cholinergic and glutamatergic transmission disorders are associated
with impaired cognitive processes, while disorders of dopaminergic, serotonergic and
noradrenergic transmission are responsible for the symptoms associated with dementia,
such as depression, apathy, anxiety and psychotic symptoms [63].
Epidemiological studies demonstrated higher occurrence of AD (2:1 women to men
ratio) and risk of developing AD in women compared to men. It is probably related to
the longer life expectancy for women. In addition, faster cognitive decline and longer life
span after diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment or AD dementia is observed in elderly
women in comparison to men [64–66]. More aggressive behaviors and higher mortality

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
4 of 33
is demonstrated in men, whereas women suffer from more severe symptoms of affective
disorders [67].
The treatment options of AD are very limited. Currently, only four drugs are approved
by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for
AD treatment. These include three drugs from the group of acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) and memantine, a selective and non-
competitive NMDA receptor antagonist [68,69]. AChE inhibitors increase ACh levels in
the synaptic cleft and partially improve cognitive function and the quality of a patient’s
life [55]. Memantine restores NMDA receptor function and exerts neuroprotective effects,
reducing the intracellular inﬂux of calcium ions [70,71]. There is a great need to search for
new therapeutic and prophylactic approaches to AD.
Taking into account the postulated pathomechanism of AD, it is believed that antioxi-
dant nutraceuticals may have beneﬁcial effects in the prevention of AD. The best-known
antioxidants include plant polyphenols such as curcumin, ﬂavonoids and phenolic acids.
Experimental studies and/or population studies suggest the possibility of beneﬁcial effects
of curcumin [3,72–74], ferulic acid [3,75–77], epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG) [3,78–80]
and caffeine [18–21,23,81–83] in AD treatment and prevention.
4. Caffeine in Alzheimer’s Disease
The studies on the effects of caffeine consumption (coffee, tea, other sources) on the
cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, dementia and AD led to differential
conclusions. Although the review articles and meta-analyses indicated rather favorable
effects of caffeine-containing dietary sources on those disorders, their conclusions were
not unequivocal [84–90]. For example, a latest systematic review supported the notion
that green tea intake might reduce the risk of those disorders [86], but the meta-analysis of
observational studies did not demonstrate the effect of tea drinking on AD speciﬁcally [87].
Similarly, the meta-analyses concerning coffee intake led to differential conclusions. A
meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies demonstrated a “J-shaped” association between
coffee intake and the occurrence of cognitive disorders (the lowest risk with daily consump-
tion level of 1–2 cups of coffee) [88]. On the other hand, another analysis of prospective
cohort studies found that higher coffee consumption was associated with reduced risk for
AD [89]. The most recent meta-analysis of prospective studies did not support an associa-
tion between coffee consumption and a risk of AD and overall dementia [90]. Moreover, it
seems worth mentioning that studies using Mendelian randomization, which is a genetic
epidemiological method, did not provide the evidence for a causal effect of habitual coffee
consumption on global cognition or memory [91]. In fact, surprisingly, one study even
suggested an association between genetically predicted higher consumption of coffee and
higher risk of AD (the report concerned analysis of genome-wide association studies of the
potentially modiﬁable risk factors of AD) [92].
It should be emphasized that other than caffeine active constituents of coffee or tea
(like phenolic acids, EGCG, trigonelline) may contribute to their effects on cognition/AD
risk [4,93]. Decaffeinated coffee constituents have been demonstrated to exert potential
beneﬁcial effects in neurodegenerative diseases [94]. However, decaffeinated coffee was
not associated with a protective effect on cognitive performance in older people [95]. The
data from the human studies do not allow to conclude on the role of caffeine itself in the
modulation of AD risk. However, there is growing evidence on the effects of caffeine on
cognition and AD development coming from numerous experimental studies.
5. Experimental Models of AD
It is crucial to use experimental models faithfully mimicking the pathologies of inves-
tigated diseases. In case of AD, it is problematic. None of the experimental AD animal
models fully reﬂects complete disorders and cognitive impairments characteristic for hu-
man AD. Although FAD accounts for about 5% of all disease cases only, the majority of
potential therapies has been investigated in transgenic mouse models of AD [42].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
5 of 33
Transgenic technologies allowed mouse and rat models to be created, based on the
mutations of APP, presenilin (PS), APOE and tau protein genes [37,42,96]. Mouse models
are the most commonly used in the experimental studies on AD, due to their low prices,
relatively short life span and similar AD symptoms to the human disease [96]. Histopatho-
logical changes in the brain tissue, depending on the mutation used, are characterized by
the presence of Aβ plaques, tau protein deposits and hippocampus atrophy [1,56,97].
APP mutations causing cognitive deﬁcits in mice and rats are related to an increased
Aβ production, increased Aβ accumulation (in the blood or cerebral vessels, in neurons
of the cortex and hippocampus), promotion of ﬁbrillogenic and toxic Aβ1-42 form or
modiﬁcation of the Aβ1-42/Aβ1-40 ratio, depending on the type of mutation [96,98–100].
Pathogenic PS1 or PS2 mutations increase the levels of Aβ1-42 form in vitro, but do not
promote Aβ plaques aggregation in vivo in mice. Several double-transgenic (2xTg) mouse
models have been developed by crossing APP and PS1 transgenic mice, demonstrating
accelerated Aβ accumulation leading to the impairment of cognitive functions [98,100,101].
In the human tau protein (h-tau) transgenic model, the mice tau gene is replaced by the
human gene correlating with NFTs development and neurodegeneration [37,42,100,102,103].
The most commonly used tau transgenic model is THY-Tau22 model in which progres-
sive development of the hippocampal tau pathology is observed. Hyperphosphorylated
hippocampal tau protein and neuroinﬂammation results in an age-dependent memory
impairment [103–105].
A triple-transgenic mice model of AD (3xTg-AD) is a combination of three muta-
tions resulting in the age-related progressive neuropathy including accumulation of Aβ
plaques and NFTs, resulting in the cognitive deﬁcits [98,106,107], whereas the 5xFAD
transgenic model concerns ﬁve mutations exhibiting severe pathology with accelerated Aβ
accumulation, senile plaques formation and neuronal loss [37,98,108].
The number of rat genetic models is much lower (for example TgF344-AD, single
Tg UKUR28, double Tg UKUR25). In the TgF344-AD rat model (human APPswe and
human PS1∆E9 mutations) accumulation of Aβ plaques, presence of NFTs, gliosis, in-
creased tau protein level and decreased basal hippocampal synaptic transmission was
observed [109,110]. Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus and cortex, and increased levels
of phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
2 (MAPK/ERK2) were observed in UKUR28 (human APPswe mutation) and UKUR25
(human APPswe and human PS1 Finn mutations) transgenic rat models [97,99,111].
Moreover, several non-mammalian species, including nematode (Caenorhabditis ele-
gans), zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) and fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster) and have been used to
create transgenic models of AD [112].
In spite of a large number transgenic animal models of AD, it should be pointed out
that results of the preclinical studies on those models have been rather not satisfactorily
translated into clinical outcomes [37].
Several pharmacological models of sporadic AD have been used. Those models in-
cluded: administration of aluminum chloride per os (p.o.) [113], intraperitoneal (i.p.) admin-
istration of scopolamine [114,115], intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injections or infusions of
Aβ [116,117], i.c.v. injections of streptozotocin (STZ) [47,118], subcutaneous (s.c.) injections
of D-galactose [78,119], i.p. injections of MK-801 (a non-competitive NMDA receptor antag-
onist) [120], olfactory bulbectomy (OBE) [121] and i.c.v. injections of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) [116,122–124] or colchicine [116]. A model of senescence-accelerated rodents (OXYS
rats) is also used as a model of sporadic AD [125,126]. It is a non-transgenic model estab-
lished by inbreeding of highly susceptible rats with spontaneously developing cataract and
accelerated senescence syndrome. OXYS rats demonstrate learning and memory deﬁcits,
decreased locomotor activity and progressive cognitive impairment [121,125,126].
To summarize, it should be pointed out that sophisticated transgenic experimental
models of AD are used in preclinical in vitro and in vivo studies on novel drugs or com-
pounds potentially useful in the prevention or treatment of AD. However, those models
reﬂect only genetic changes present in familial AD, whereas the sporadic form of AD is

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
6 of 33
much more common. On the other hand, mostly rather simplistic models of sporadic AD
are currently being used in the experimental studies. Some of them are controversial, for
example the scopolamine model [112,127]. It seems that there is a need for development of
new, reliable models of sporadic AD.
5.1. Effects of Caffeine in Experimental Animal Models of AD
5.1.1. Transgenic Rodent Models
The effects of caffeine have been studied in various transgenic models of AD, in-
cluding APPswe, double transgenic (2xTg) APPswe/PS1, THY-Tau22 and 3xTg models
(Table 1) [104,105,128–136].
The most commonly used transgenic models of AD in animals is the APPswe mouse
model. In the APPswe model, mice develop cognitive deﬁcits, learning impairment
and age-dependent spatial memory dysfunction [37,98,129–131]. Expression of human
APP in transgenic mice model enable Aβ plaques deposition and synaptic and neuritic
dystrophy [130,131,137].
In studies on the APPswe transgenic mice model, caffeine intake prevented cognitive
impairment, memory deﬁcits and exerted neuroprotective activity [128–131,133]. The neu-
roprotective caffeine activity associated with reduced Aβ production resulted from the inhi-
bition of BACE-1 and γ-secretase [129], suppressed neuronal cell death, reduced caspase-3
activity [131], activation of cAMP/PKA (cyclic adenosine monophosphate/phosphokinase
A) signaling pathway and stimulation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
phosphorylation in the striatum [128]. Two-week caffeine treatment in APPswe mice ex-
erted antiapoptotic activity (decreased the expression of phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) and phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in the stria-
tum and frontal cortex) [128]. Long-term treatment with caffeine improved mitochon-
drial functions in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex and striatum in APPswe transgenic
mice [133]. No effect on A1R and A2AR hippocampal density was observed in APPswe
transgenic mice treated with caffeine [129]. Caffeine treatment in N2a neuroblastoma
cells transfected with mutant APPswe indicated slight antioxidant activity associated with
reduced ROS production [133].
Chronic intake of crude (containing 95.95% caffeine) and pure caffeine prevented
memory disorders in APPswe mice model. However, only crude caffeine reduced the level
of Aβ and formation of Aβ plaques in the hippocampus. Crude caffeine increased the level
of ATP (an indicator of cell survival), reduced caspase-3 activity and reduced Aβ-induced
neuronal cell death [131]. Crude and pure caffeine increased the number of cholinergic
neurons in Aβ-treated cultures [131]. Greater effects of crude caffeine may result from
the activity of other than caffeine components. Phenolic substances (about 1%) may be
responsible for antioxidant activity of crude caffeine which exhibited much higher values
than pure caffeine in the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) assay [131,138]. More-
over crude caffeine strongly inhibited cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), whereas pure caffeine
did not inhibit the enzyme [138]. The authors concluded that substantial antioxidant and
anti-inﬂammatory effects of crude caffeine are crucial in preventing cognitive and memory
impairment in APPswe transgenic mice [131].
Studies on caffeine were also performed on 2xTg and 3xTg animal models. Double
transgenic mice indicate rapid rate and early onset of AD associated with cognitive impair-
ment [98]. For example, the double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice model is related to Aβ
plaque formation in the cortex and hippocampus [37,98]. In those mice spatial learning
and memory assessed in the water maze test worsened [132].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
7 of 33
Table 1. Transgenic models.
Model
Caffeine Dose and
Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
APPswe (K670N/
M671L) male
and female mice
Caffeine: 0.3 g/L p.o. in
drinking water for 5.5 months;
start: 4-month-old mice,
8-month-old at the start
of behavioral tests, 9.5-month-old at the end
of behavioral tests
To investigate the possible
neuroprotective effects of
long-term dietary caffeine
intake in APPswe transgenic
mice.
Caffeine protected against cognitive impairment. It reduced
Aβ levels in the hippocampus, restored brain adenosine
levels, but did not affect the A1R and A2AR hippocampal
density and expression in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus.
[129]
APPswe (K670N/
M671L) mice
Caffeine: 1.5 mg p.o.
for 2 weeks, every 12 h;
start: 9.5-month-old mice
To investigate the effects of
caffeine on the signal transduction
pathways (PKA, CREB, JNK
and ERK) in cognitively
important areas of the brain.
Caffeine showed beneﬁcial effects in the brain function and
exerted neuroprotective and antiapoptotic effect by
stimulating PKA activity, increasing the level of
phosphorylated CREB and decreasing JNK and ERK
phosphorylation.
[128]
APPswe (K670N/
M671L) mice
Caffeine: 0.6 mg/day in drinking water for 1 month;
start: 11- to 12-month-old mice
To explain the protective
mechanism of caffeine and
melatonin administration
against cognitive dysfunction
in transgenic APPswe mice.
Caffeine and melatonin prevented cognitive impairment.
Caffeine slightly increased mitochondrial functions, however
it inhibited the enhancement of mitochondrial functions
provided by melatonin.
[133]
APPswe (K670N/
M671L) and
Indiana (V717F) mutation
male mice
0.0395% crude caffeine (95.95% caffeine, 1.1%
moisture, 1.04% fat,
0.1% ash) in diet or
0.0375% pure caffeine
in diet for 2 months;
start: 3-month-old mice
To investigate the effects of
consumption of crude and
pure caffeine on the learning
and memory processes
in transgenic AD mice.
Crude and pure caffeine administered for two months partly
prevented memory deﬁcits (crude caffeine exerted greater
effect). Crude caffeine (but not pure) reduced Aβ1-42 levels,
suppressed Aβ accumulation and reduced the number of Aβ
plaques in the hippocampus. Both prevented Aβ-induced
neuronal cell death and exerted antiapoptotic activity
suppressing caspase-3 activity. Antioxidant and
anti-inﬂammatory effects of crude caffeine were also
demonstrated in APPswe mice.
[131]
APPswe mice
and APPswe/PS1 mice
Caffeine: 1.5 mg i.p.,
single administration,
3- to 4-month-old
APPswe mice;
caffeine: 1.5 mg i.p. or p.o., single administration, 14-month-old
APPswe mice;
caffeine: 1.5 mg i.p.,
single administration,
14-month-old
APPswe/PS1 mice;
caffeine: 1.5 mg p.o. twice-daily for 7 days,
15- to 20-month-old APPswe/PS1 mice;
caffeine: 1.5 mg p.o., two
administrations on one day every 4th day for 2 months, 20-month-old
APPswe/PS1 mice;
To investigate the effects of
acute and long-term caffeine
administration on the cognitive
performance and Aβ levels
in APPswe and APPswe/PS1
transgenic mice.
Long-term caffeine intake improved cognitive functions in
APPswe and APPswe/PS1 mice. Decreased Aβ levels in the
plasma were observed after single administration of caffeine
and long-term caffeine treatments in both transgenic mice
models. Chronic caffeine treatment reduced soluble Aβ level
in the cortex and hippocampus and insoluble Aβ level in the
hippocampus in APPswe mice. Acute caffeine administration
rapidly reduced the Aβ level also in the interstitial ﬂuid in the
hippocampus but did not affect Aβ elimination in APPswe
mice.
[134]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
8 of 33
Table 1. Cont.
Model
Caffeine Dose and
Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
APPswe/PS1
mice and
APPswe mice, control
non-transgenic mice
Caffeine: 0.3 mg
(unconcentrated coffee) i.p., single administration
or 1.5 mg (concentrated
coffee) i.p., single
administration or
0.06 mg (concentrated
decaffeinated coffee) i.p.,
single administration,
6- to 8-month-old APPswe/PS1 transgenic
mice;
caffeine: 0.75 mg
(concentrated coffee) p.o., twice weekly for 3 months
or 0.03 mg (decaffeinated coffee) p.o., twice weekly
for 3 months, 10-month-old APPswe transgenic mice
To investigate the effects of
acute and long-term treatment
with coffee or decaffeinated
coffee (to compare the effect
of caffeine to coffee) on
the plasma cytokine and
Aβ levels and behavior (only
after long-term treatment) in
transgenic mice models of AD.
Acute caffeine intake increased the level of G-CSF and IL-10
in plasma (concentrated and unconcentrated coffee) and IL-6
level in plasma (only concentrated coffee). Higher plasma
caffeine concentrations were related to lower levels of Aβ in
plasma. Single treatment with coffee (concentrated and
unconcentrated) increased G-CSF, IL-6 and IL-10 plasma
levels also in non-transgenic mice. Long-term treatment with
concentrated coffee (but not decaffeinated coffee) favorably
affected cognitive interference task and elevated level of
G-CSF (but not other cytokines) in plasma in transgenic mice.
Improvement of cognitive performance was associated with
higher G-CSF levels suggesting that elevated G-CSF levels
may be associated with possible beneﬁcial effects of coffee
against AD.
[136]
APPswe/PS1
mice
Caffeine: 0.75 mg/day or
1.5 mg/day p.o. for 8 weeks;
12-month-old mice
To investigate the effects of
caffeine intake on the memory
deﬁcits, BDNF and TrkB
expression in APPswe/PS1
double transgenic mice.
Caffeine at both doses used increased spatial learning ability
and memory capability. Caffeine treatment increased the
expression of hippocampal BDNF and TrkB. Caffeine exerted
protective role against memory impairment in APPswe/PS1
mice.
[132]
THY-Tau22
male mice
Caffeine: 0.3 g/L p.o.
in drinking water for
10 months;
start: 2-month-old mice
To investigate the effects of
chronic caffeine intake on
the development of hippocampal
tau protein pathologies and
spatial memory disorders in
THY-Tau22 transgenic mice.
Chronic caffeine intake prevented spatial memory deﬁcits
and improved memory performance. Caffeine effect was
associated with a reduction of neuroinﬂammation and
decrease in the hippocampal level of hyperphosphorylated
tau protein. Caffeine treatment decreased oxidative stress
(reduced expression of MnSOD and EAAT3) in THY-Tau22
mice.
[104]
THY-Tau22
female mice
Caffeine: 0.3 g/L p.o.
in drinking water;
start of caffeine
administration: 2 weeks
before mating;
end of caffeine
administration: 15th
postnatal day;
8- or 12-month-old at
the start of behavioral tests.
To investigate the effects of
long-term caffeine exposure
during pregnancy in offspring
in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice.
The exposure to caffeine during pregnancy induced
physiological disorders and accelerated cognitive disorders in
THY-Tau22 transgenic mice model and may be a risk factor
for early stages of AD.
[105]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
9 of 33
Table 1. Cont.
Model
Caffeine Dose and
Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
3xTg (APPswe,
PS1/M146V
and tau P301L) male mice,
control non-transgenic
mice
Caffeine: 0.3 mg/mL
in drinking water p.o.
for 7 months;
start: 6-month-old mice;
behavioral testing at 13 months of age.
To investigate the effects of
long-term caffeine administration
on the memory and learning in
3xTg-AD mice with behavioral
and psychological symptoms
of dementia (BPSD) proﬁle.
Caffeine increased motor activity, total horizontal activity and
emotionality in the behavioral tests in non-transgenic mice
and reduced it in 3xTg-AD mice. Caffeine administration
increased spontaneous motor activity (to a greater extent at
night) only in 3xTg-AD mice. Results indicate that
aggravation of BPSD-like behaviors, anxiety-related
behaviors or neophobia adversely affected possible beneﬁcial
effects of caffeine treatment (improvement of memory and
learning) in 3xTg-AD mice.
[135]
3xTg—triple-transgenic. A1R—adenosine A1 receptor. A2AR—adenosine A2A receptor. Aβ—amyloid β. AD—Alzheimer’s disease. BDNF—brain-derived neurotrophic factor. BPSD—behavioral and
psychological symptoms of dementia. CREB—cAMP response element-binding protein. EAAT3—excitatory amino acid transporter 3. ERK—extracellular signal-regulated kinase. G-CSF—granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor. IL—interleukin. i.p.—intraperitoneally. JNK—c-Jun N-terminal kinase. MnSOD—manganese superoxide dismutase. Nrf2—nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. PKA—phosphokinase A.
p.o.—per os. TrkB—tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
10 of 33
Acute intake of caffeine by APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice resulted in a reduced Aβ
production (by inhibiting γ-secretase and BACE-1) and reduced Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 levels in
plasma (the same effects were observed in transgenic APPswe mice). Similarly, long-term
caffeine administration to APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice was related to a permanent and
sustained decrease in the Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 levels in plasma and reduced Aβ accumulation
in the brain. Chronic caffeine administration enhanced cognitive performance in the
transgenic mice [134].
Acute caffeine use (administered as a coffee constituent) increased the levels of
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor—G-CSF, IL-6 and IL-10 in plasma in APPswe/PS1
double transgenic mice and in non-transgenic mice. Higher levels of plasma caffeine were
related to lower levels of plasma Aβ in APPswe/PS1 transgenic mice. Chronic intake of
concentrated coffee improved cognitive performance and increased the level of G-CSF
in plasma in APPswe transgenic mice. The authors concluded that coffee (as a source
of caffeine) may protect against AD and that elevated G-CSF levels may contribute to
favorable effects of coffee [136].
Also chronic treatment with caffeine in double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice reversed
memory impairment [132]. Caffeine improved spatial learning and memory, which was
demonstrated by a decrease of escape latency time and longer time spent in the target
quadrant assessed in the water maze test. The effects of caffeine were dose dependent. The
mechanism of changes could involve the effect on the brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)—tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B (TrkB) signaling pathway, taking part in
the learning and memory processes, since caffeine exerted dose-dependent increase in the
expression of hippocampal BDNF and TrkB [132].
In a transgenic model of tau disorders, THY-Tau22 mice, progressively developing
memory dysfunction is associated with hippocampal neuroinﬂammation that promotes
tau protein hyperphosphorylation and aggregation [104,105,139]. Chronic administration
of caffeine to THY-Tau22 transgenic mice prevented behavioral disorders and spatial mem-
ory deﬁcits. The beneﬁcial activity of caffeine on memory was associated with reduced
hyperphosphorylated tau protein level in the hippocampus [104]. The deletion of A2AR
improved memory, prevented spatial memory deﬁcits and hippocampal long-term de-
pression in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice [139]. It did not affect the tau protein level and
the number of proteolytic tau fragments, which were reduced by caffeine intake in the
previous study [104]. It may indicate that mechanism of caffeine in the regulation of tau-
related pathology was more complex than only blockade of A2AR in THY-Tau22 transgenic
mice [139].
Moreover, caffeine exerted anti-inﬂammatory activity (reduced level of proinﬂamma-
tory cytokines: chemokine ligand factor 4—CCl4, chemokine ligand factor 5—CCl5 and
TNF-α) and antioxidant activity (decreased activity of manganese superoxide dismutase—
MnSOD and excitatory amino acid transporter 3—EAAT3 involved in the glutathione
synthesis) in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice [104]. However, when caffeine was administered
to pregnant THY-Tau22 transgenic rats, accelerated physiological and cognitive disorders in
offspring were observed. Those results indicate that exposure to caffeine during pregnancy
in rats may be a risk factor for early stages of AD [105].
Effects of caffeine were also studied in 3xTg-AD mice (carrying APPswe, PS1/M146V
and tau P301L transgenes). The effects of long-term intake of caffeine in 3xTg-AD mice
were assessed in multiple behavioral tests (lasting 21 days) to evaluate sensorimotor
functions, exploratory activity, bizarre movements, emotional and anxiety-like behaviors,
risk assessment, visual perceptual learning and reference spatial learning and memory in
comparison with normal non-transgenic mice. Some of the tests were interpreted as tests
concerning BPSD-like behaviors [135]. The effects of caffeine treatment in the two models
were differential. Caffeine in control non-transgenic mice improved some behavioral
parameters connected with cognition, exploratory and locomotor activity. Caffeine did not
counteract any of behavioral disorders observed in 3xTg-AD mice, moreover some of the
behavioral parameters even worsened (mostly those related to the anxiety-like behaviors).

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
11 of 33
Caffeine increased horizontal locomotor activity in the open ﬁeld test in non-transgenic
mice and reduced it in 3xTg-AD mice; increased emotionality in the open ﬁeld test, elevated
plus maze and hole-board test in non-transgenic mice and reduced these parameters in
3xTg-AD mice; increased total horizontal activity in the open ﬁeld test in non-transgenic
mice and reduced it in 3xTg-AD mice. Caffeine increased overall spontaneous motor
activity (to a greater extent at night) in circadian motor activity test only in 3xTg-AD
mice [135]. The authors interpreted their results that anxiogenic effect (associated with
anxiety and neophobia) induced by caffeine interfered with beneﬁcial effects of caffeine
consumption on cognition (improved visual perceptive learning, spatial learning and
memory) in 3xTg-AD mice [135].
5.1.2. Non-Transgenic Rodent Models
Several non-transgenic models of AD have been used to evaluate the effects of caf-
feine (Table 2). In a model of AD induced by i.c.v. administration of Aβ25-35, in which
cognitive dysfunction is observed (Y-maze test and inhibitory avoidance task), acute caf-
feine administration at a higher i.p. dose or combined 12-day administration in drinking
water, followed by acute administration at a lower i.p. dose, prevented Aβ-induced
disorders in mice. There was no beneﬁcial effect of the 12-day treatment with caffeine
alone [117]. It was concluded that mechanism of caffeine action resulted from the blockade
of A2AR rather than A1R, because similar effects were observed after a selective A2AR
antagonist—SCH58261 administration [117]. In other studies, selective A2AR antagonists
also prevented Aβ-induced progressive cognitive impairment and synaptic deterioration
in rats [120,140].
Long-term administration of D-galactose to rats is associated with increased oxida-
tive stress resulting in memory impairment, neuroinﬂammation and neurodegeneration.
Concurrent caffeine intake improved memory functions and attenuated cognitive decline
in the D-galactose-treated aging rats as demonstrated in the Y-maze behavioral test. Caf-
feine administration exerted anti-inﬂammatory activity (reduced level of COX-2, nitric
oxide synthase-2 (NOS-2), TNF-α and IL-1β), antioxidant activity (decreased level of
oxidative stress marker—8-oxoguanine) and antiapoptotic activity (decreased B-cell lym-
phoma 2-associated X protein/B-cell lymphoma protein-2 (BAX/Bcl-2) ratio and reduced
caspase-3 and caspase-9 expression) in rats with accelerated aging induced by D-galactose
administration. Caffeine treatment alleviated synaptic dysfunction (increasing the level of
presynaptic proteins synaptophysin and post-synaptic protein PSD95 in the hippocampus)
in D-galactose-treated rats [119].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
12 of 33
Table 2. Non-transgenic models.
Model
Caffeine Dose and Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
Adult CF1 male mice
administered
with Aβ25–35 i.c.v.
(3 nmol; volume: 3 µL)
Caffeine: 1 mg/mL p.o. in
drinking water (22 mg/kg/day) for 12 days, Aβ
i.c.v. on 7th day;
caffeine: 30 or 80 mg/kg i.p.,
single administration,
30 min before Aβ i.c.v.
caffeine: 30 mg/kg for 4 days,
Aβ i.c.v. after 2 days of
caffeine intake;
caffeine: 1 mg/mL p.o.
in drinking water (for 12 days) and 30 mg/kg i.p.,
single
administration, 30 min
before Aβ i.c.v.;
behavioral tests were
performed 8–9 days after
Aβ i.c.v. administration.
To investigate the effects of
caffeine and a selective A2AR
antagonist against cognitive
impairment in AD induced
by i.c.v. Aβ25–35 administration
in mice.
Blockade of A2AR by caffeine or by a selective
A2AR antagonist prevented cognitive impairment,
neurodegeneration and brain destruction in
Aβ-induced AD mice model.
[117]
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats
with accelerated
aging induced
by D-galactose
administration
(120 mg/kg i.p.
for 60 days)
Caffeine: 3 mg/kg/day i.p.
for 60 days (during
D-galactose treatment period)
To investigate the effects of
chronic caffeine intake on
neurodegeneration induced
by D-galactose-aging rat model.
Chronic caffeine intake reduced oxidative stress
(decreased 8-oxoguanine level), neuroinﬂammation,
neuronal cells apoptosis, neurodegeneration, synaptic
dysfunction and memory deﬁcits induced by
D-galactose injections.
[119]
Adult male Wistar
rats with AD induced by i.c.v.
administration of STZ (3 mg/kg;
single bilateral
administration)
Caffeine: 1 g/L in drinking
water for 2 weeks before
and 4 weeks after STZ
administration.
Behavioral tests 4 weeks
after STZ administration
To investigate the effects of
caffeine intake on the expression and
density of adenosine
receptors and hippocampal
neurodegeneration in
STZ-induced rat model of AD.
Caffeine administration prevented the STZ-induced
memory deﬁcits, sporadic dementia,
neurodegeneration and decreased expression and
density of A2AR in the hippocampus.
[141]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
13 of 33
Table 2. Cont.
Model
Caffeine Dose and Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
Adult male
Sprague-Dawley
rats treated with
AlCl3 (17 mg/kg p.o.
for 4 weeks)
Caffeine 1.5 mg/kg p.o.
for 4 weeks concurrently
with AlCl3 or two weeks
before the start and for
4 weeks during AlCl3
administration
To investigate the effects of
caffeine on the histological
picture of hippocampus,
expression of BDNF, TrkB,
and immunoreactivity of Ki-67
and GFAP in the hippocampus
in rats with AlCl3-induced AD.
Caffeine intake exerted neuroprotective activity
(improvement of histological hippocampus picture,
stronger Ki-67 and weaker GFAP immunoreactivity,
increased BDNF and TrkB gene
expression). The effects were stronger in rats treated
with caffeine also before the start of AlCl3
administration.
[142]
Adult male Wistar
rats treated with AlCl3 (100 mg/kg p.o.
for 30 days)
Caffeine: 20 mg/kg i.p.
for 30 days, 1 h before AlCl3
p.o. intake
To evaluate an antioxidant,
anti-inﬂammatory and
anticholinesterase properties of caffeine
against AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity in
rats.
Caffeine exerted neuroprotective, antioxidant and
anticholinesterase activity against AlCl3-induced
neurotoxicity in rats. It reduced oxidative stress
parameters (NO level), decreased AChE and
Na+/K+-ATPase activity in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus (Na+/K+-ATPase activity also in the
striatum). Caffeine revealed also anti-inﬂammatory
properties by reducing the increased TNF-α levels in
the hippocampus and striatum associated with
AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity.
[143]
Fisher-344
young male rats (3-month-old)
treated with LPS
(0.250 µg/h i.c.v.
by osmotic minipump for 4 weeks);
Fisher-344 male aged rats (24-month-old)
Caffeine: 0.5, 5, 10, 20 or 40 mg/kg/day i.p. for 2 or
4 weeks
to young rats;
caffeine: 40 mg/kg/day i.p.
for 2 weeks to aged rats
To investigate the effects of
different caffeine doses
in LPS-induced
neuroinﬂammation in young
rats and in age-related
neuroinﬂammation in aged
rats (with naturally increased
level of microglia activation).
Caffeine exerted potential protective effect against
LPS-induced neuroinﬂammation. It was demonstrated
that caffeine may decrease neuroinﬂammation by a
reduction in the number of activated microglial cells in
the hippocampus and through regulation of glutamate
neurotransmission.
[122]
C57BL/6N male mice treated with LPS
(250 µg/kg i.p.
for 2 weeks;
7 doses in 2 weeks)
Caffeine: 30 mg/kg/day i.p.
for 6 weeks
To investigate the effect of
caffeine administration against
LPS-induced oxidative stress,
neuroinﬂammation, apoptotic
cell death, neurodegeneration
and synaptic impairment
in mice.
Caffeine reduced LPS-induced oxidative stress,
neuroinﬂammation and synaptic dysfunctions
(increased expression of Nrf2, HO-1 and Bcl-2, reduced
expression of TLR-4, p-NF-κB, p-JNK, BAX, caspase-3,
TNF-α, COX-2, NOS-2 and synaptic markers) in mouse
brains.
[123]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
14 of 33
Table 2. Cont.
Model
Caffeine Dose and Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
CF1 male mice (3-4-month-old)
with cholinergic blockade induced
by a single scopolamine hydrobromide
administration
(2 mg/kg i.p.)
Caffeine: 10 mg/kg i.p.
for 4 days before scopolamine hydrobromide
administration; scopolamine administration:
15 min before or immediately after the inhibitory
avoidance test, immediately after training session
in the novel object
recognition task, 90 min
before the open ﬁeld test;
independent group of mice
for each test
To investigate the effect of
caffeine intake on short-term
and long-term memory
impairment induced by
a single scopolamine
administration, assessed
in three behavioral tests.
Pretreatment with caffeine prevented
scopolamine-induced impairment in the acquisition
phase when short-term memory was assessed in the
inhibitory avoidance task, and in the consolidation
phase when short-term and long-term memory were
assessed in the inhibitory avoidance task. Caffeine
administration prevented scopolamine-induced
short-term and long-term memory deﬁcits (assessed in
the novel object recognition task). Caffeine exerted
beneﬁcial effect in the cholinergic-induced memory
disruption. There was no effect of caffeine treatment on
the spontaneous locomotor activity assessed in the
open ﬁeld test.
[115]
A2AR—adenosine A2A receptor. Aβ—amyloid β. AChE—acetylcholinesterase. AD—Alzheimer’s disease. AlCl3—aluminum chloride. ATP—adenosine triphosphate. BAX—B-cell lymphoma 2-associated X
protein. Bcl-2—B-cell lymphoma protein-2. BDNF—brain-derived neurotrophic factor. COX-2—cyclooxygenase-2. GFAP—glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein. HO-1—hemeoxygenase 1. i.c.v.—intracerebroventricularly.
i.p.—intraperitoneally. LPS—lipopolysaccharide. NOS-2—nitric oxide synthase-2. Nrf2—nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. p-JNK—phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase. p-NF-κB—phosphorylated
nuclear factor-κB. p.o.—per os. STZ—streptozotocin. TNF-α—tumor necrosis factor α. TLR-4—toll-like receptor 4. TrkB—tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
15 of 33
The STZ-induced AD model is associated with impaired brain glucose metabolism, Aβ
accumulation and tau hyperphosphorylation. STZ i.c.v. administration increase oxidative
stress, AChE activity and neuroinflammation in the hippocampus and cortex [35,96,116,144].
Chronic caffeine administration prevented STZ-induced progressive memory loss, sporadic
dementia and neurodegeneration. It also decreased the expression and density of A2AR in
the hippocampus (not affecting A1R density) in rats [141]. Moreover, caffeine administered
to rodents with diabetes mellitus induced by i.p. STZ injections prevented learning and
memory deﬁcits [145,146].
In the AlCl3-induced AD model, administration of aluminum chloride increases level
of Aβ, BACE-1, hyperphosphorylated tau protein, proinﬂammatory cytokines (TNF-α,
IL-6) and oxidative stress markers in the hippocampus and cortex [35,147]. Chronic caffeine
intake exerted neuroprotective activity demonstrated by improvement of the histological
hippocampus picture (decreased neuronal apoptosis observed in CA1 and CA3 hippocam-
pal regions) in AlCl3 treated rats. Moreover, increased proliferation marker protein—Ki-67
immunoreactivity, decreased glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunoreactivity, and
increased expression of BDNF and TrkB were observed after caffeine intake [142]. Further
studies on caffeine showed that neuroprotective activity may have resulted from reduced
oxidative stress (reduced levels of NO in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum
and increased level of reduced glutathione—GSH in the hippocampus) and attenuated
AlCl3-induced lipid peroxidation (reduced level of malondialdehyde—MDA in the cerebral
cortex, hippocampus and striatum). Caffeine decreased activity of Na+/K+-ATPase in the
cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum, and reduced activity of AChE in the cerebral
cortex and hippocampus. Also anti-inﬂammatory properties of caffeine were demonstrated
(decreased TNF-α level in the hippocampus and striatum) in AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity
in rats [143].
LPS administration induces chronic neuroinﬂammation and amyloidosis leading
to cognitive deﬁcits and memory impairment, reﬂecting processes speciﬁc for sporadic
type of AD [124]. Increased BACE-1 and γ-secretase activity leading to Aβ hippocam-
pal accumulation, elevated proinﬂammatory cytokines level (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α),
mitochondrial dysfunction, and increased ROS production is observed in LPS-induced
model of AD in rats [124]. Caffeine exerted protective effect against LPS-induced and
age-related neuroinﬂammation associated with microglia activation in rats [122]. It has
been demonstrated that caffeine may decrease neuroinﬂammation by a reduction in the
number of activated microglial cells in the CA3 hippocampus region and regulation of
glutamate neurotransmission [122]. Caffeine administration inhibited LPS-induced oxida-
tive stress, neuroinﬂammation and synaptic dysfunctions (increasing expression of nuclear
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), hemeoxygenase 1 (HO-1) and Bcl-2, reducing
expression of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), phosphorylated nuclear factor-κB (p-NF-κB),
phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (p-JNK), BAX, caspase-3, TNF-α, COX-2 and
NOS-2) in mice [123].
Intraperitoneal administration of scopolamine, a non-selective, competitive mus-
carinic receptor antagonist, is associated with acute memory and attention deﬁcits through
cholinergic system blockade [112,115]. Long-term cholinergic dysfunction results in a
reduced number of cholinergic neurons, decreased ACh level in the brain, increased AChE
activity and suppressed choline acetyltransferase activity. Moreover, scopolamine increases
oxidative stress, apoptosis, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinﬂammation in animal
AD models [148–150]. Although the scopolamine-induced amnesia/memory impairment
as a model of AD was widely used in the past, the relevance of scopolamine in current
experimental AD studies is very limited [112,114]. Cholinergic dysfunction observed after
acute scopolamine administration is not related to the hallmarks of AD (Aβ or hyperphos-
phorylated tau protein) and disease progression [112]. The effects of caffeine (or selective
adenosine receptors antagonists) were studied only after acute scopolamine adminis-
tration. In scopolamine-treated mice, caffeine administration prevented short-term and
long-term memory deﬁcits assessed in the behavioral tests (novel object recognition task

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
16 of 33
and inhibitory avoidance task), indicating possible beneﬁcial effect in cholinergic-induced
memory disruption [115]. Caffeine ameliorated also scopolamine-induced memory im-
pairment in humans [151]. The beneﬁcial effect of caffeine probably resulted from its dual
ability to blockade of A1R and A2AR [115]. Studies conducted in scopolamine-treated
rats showed that A1R and A2AR antagonists prevented scopolamine-induced memory
impairment [61,152,153].
5.1.3. Rabbit Cholesterol-Induced Model
A high cholesterol diet-induced rabbit model of AD is characterized by an elevated
Aβ level in the brain, increased tau protein hyperphosphorylation and disturbed BBB
integrity (associated with a disrupted brain cholesterol homeostasis) leading to the learning
impairment [154]. Chronic caffeine administration to rabbits fed a cholesterol-enriched diet
prevented dysfunction of BBB, decreased activation of astrocytes and decreased density
of microglia [155] (Table 3). In another study, caffeine intake decreased Aβ level, Aβ
production and Aβ deposition in the hippocampus, reduced hyperphosphorylated tau
protein level in the hippocampus (probably associated with the reduction of phospho-
rylated glycogen synthase kinase-3β (pGSK-3β) enzyme level which is involved in the
tau protein phosphorylation), decreased oxidative stress (reduced ROS generation and
H2O2 production, and increased reduced/oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) ratio) and
restored A1R level, reduced by cholesterol. There was no caffeine effect on the cholesterol
concentration in plasma in rabbits [156].
5.1.4. Nematode Models
Nematodes are suitable for experimental studies on AD due to their short lifespan,
short generation time, transparent body and simple creation of new transgenic lines.
Many human genes associated with AD have orthologues in nematodes Caenorhabditis
elegans [112,157]. Various strains of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans with human neu-
rotoxic proteins (Aβ1-42, APP, tau protein) expression are used to investigate the cellular
and molecular mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases [112,158–160]. Expression of the
human Aβ1-42 in muscles causes, among other things, development of paralysis, whereas
its expression in neurons results in their neurodegeneration, and odor preference learning
disruption [96,159]. After expression of the human APP in Caenorhabditis elegans, only
products of α-secretase or γ-secretase cleavage (but not β-secretase) are detected, and
APP-induced cholinergic neurodegeneration is observed [159]. Expression of the h-tau pro-
tein in Caenorhabditis elegans leads to tau aggregate formation and accumulation, neuronal
degeneration and synaptic abnormalities resulting in locomotion defects and behavioral
impairment [96,159].
In studies conducted on the nematode AD models, plant extracts containing caffeine
were investigated, including the extracts from Ilex paraguariensis leaves [161], Paullinia
cupana (guarana) seeds [158], Coffea beans [160], and Zijuan Pu’er tea [162] (Table 4). All
studied extracts prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in transgenic models of AD in Caenorhabditis el-
egans, delaying the paralysis progression in worms and extending their lifespan [158,160–162].
However, coffee extract (10% v/v, containing 3.6 mM caffeine) treatment did not reduce
Aβ aggregation and Aβ distribution. The authors concluded that beneﬁcial effect of cof-
fee probably resulted from skn-1/Nrf2 signaling pathway activation; similar effects were
observed after treatment with decaffeinated coffee (0.032 mM caffeine) [160]. A mixture
of Zijuan Pu’er tea water extract ingredients (MCCP), containing (+)-catechins, caffeine
and procyanidins, decreased Aβ aggregation and activated the DAF-16 signaling pathway,
which was associated with lifespan extension and oxidative stress reduction in Caenorhabdi-
tis elegans, and could be mediated by a heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1) and skn-1 [162]. Guarana
hydroalcoholic extract and decaffeinated guarana extract treatments were also associated
with antioxidant activity and protein degradation pathways, partially through skn-1 and
DAF-16 activation [158].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
17 of 33
Table 3. Rabbit model.
Model
Caffeine Dose and Study
Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
New Zealand
white rabbits
(1.5- to 2-years-old) fed a 2%
cholesterol-enriched diet
Caffeine: 3 mg/day
in 50 mL of drinking water for 12
weeks
To investigate the effects
of caffeine on BBB leakage
in rabbits fed a cholesterol-enriched
diet as a model
of sporadic AD.
Chronic caffeine administration prevented dysfunction of
BBB, decreased activation of astrocytes and decreased
density of
microglia induced by high cholesterol diet in rabbits.
[155]
New Zealand
white male rabbits
(1.5- to 2-years-old)
fed a 2% cholesterol-enriched diet
Caffeine: 0.5 mg/day
or 30 mg/day in drinking water for
12 weeks
To investigate the effects
of caffeine treatment on
molecular mechanisms
of AD-like pathology in
the cholesterol-fed rabbit
model of AD.
Chronic caffeine intake decreased Aβ accumulation in the
hippocampus and reduced hyperphosphorylated tau
protein level in the hippocampus (reduced phosphorylated
GSK-3β enzyme level). Caffeine prevented oxidative
damage (reduced ROS generation and H2O2 production,
increased GSH/GSSG ratio) and restored the level of A1R,
reduced by cholesterol in rabbits. Caffeine did not affect the
level of A2AR and RyRs and the cholesterol concentration in
plasma.
[156]
A1R—adenosine A1 receptor. Aβ—amyloid β. AD—Alzheimer’s disease. BBB—blood-brain barrier. GSH/GSSG—reduced/oxidized glutathione. GSK-3β—glycogen synthase kinase-3β. ROS—reactive oxygen
species. RyR—ryanodine receptor.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
18 of 33
Table 4. Nematode models.
Model
Caffeine Dose and Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
Caenorhabditis
elegans strains: wild-type N2,
CL2006 dvIs2
Ilex paraguariensis hydroalcoholic extract
(IPHE):
2 or 4 mg/mL
(41 or 87 µM caffeine);
caffeine: 200 or 400 µM.
Treatment since ﬁrst
larval stage till required
age for test.
To investigate the effects
of IPHE and caffeine
administration on the Aβ-induced
toxicity
in Caenorhabditis elegans.
IPHE and caffeine extended lifespan of worms, decreased
AChE activity and reduced Aβ deposition and toxicity
leading to worms’ paralysis. IPHE and caffeine reduced also
Aβ mRNA levels and increased expression of hsp-16.2
(chaperone protein which overexpression causes
suppression of Aβ-toxicity). After both treatments an
antioxidant activity (reduced ROS levels) was observed.
[161]
Various
Caenorhabditis
elegans strains
10% coffee extract
(3.6 mM caffeine);
To investigate the effects
of coffee extract treatment
on the Aβ-induced toxicity
in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Coffee extract prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in the
transgenic models of AD in Caenorhabditis elegans. It induced
also a delay in the paralysis progression in worms. No
reduction in Aβ expression, Aβ aggregation and
distribution was observed in coffee-treated group. The
beneﬁcial effect of coffee may result from skn-1/Nrf2
pathway induction.
[160]
Caenorhabditis
elegans strains: wild-type N2,
CL4176 dvls27,
TJ356 zIs356,
CF1553 muIs84
0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 mg/mL
Zijuan Pu’er tea water
extract (ZTWE) containing:
(+)-catechins, caffeine,
procyanidins.
Mixture of three main
constituents in ZTWE: (+)-catechins,
caffeine, procyanidins—MCCP.
To investigate the effects
of ZTWE and MCPP on
the Aβ-induced toxicity
in various Caenorhabditis
elegans strains.
ZTWE and MCCP delayed Aβ-induced paralysis in worms.
MCCP alleviated AD progression and pathologies related to
AD due to reduced Aβ-induced toxicity (decreased Aβ
aggregation), and increased antioxidant activity (activated
DAF-16 signaling pathway associated with oxidative stress
resistance; decreased ROS production).
[162]
Caenorhabditis elegans strains:
wild-type N2, CL4176 dvls27,
CL2006, AM141, HA759, rtIs11,
TJ375, CL2166
Guarana hydroalcoholic extract (GHE)
containing:
caffeine: 166.1 µg/mL,
theobromine: 2.5 µg/mL,
catechin: 34.6 µg/mL,
epicatechin: 36.3 µg/mL.
10 or 50 mg/mL GHE
To investigate the effects
of GHE treatment in
Caenorhabditis elegans
models of AD.
GHE prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in the transgenic
models of AD in Caenorhabditis elegans. GHE delayed
paralysis in nematodes, reduced ROS level and activated
protein degradation. DAF-16 and skn-1 are responsible for
the beneﬁcial effect against Aβ-induced toxicity.
[158]
Aβ—amyloid β. AChE—acetylcholinesterase. AD—Alzheimer’s disease. BBB—blood-brain barrier. DAF-16—abnormal dauer formation 16. GHE—guarana hydroalcoholic extract. GSH/GSSG—
reduced/oxidized glutathione. hsp—heat shock protein. IPHE—Ilex paraguariensis hydroalcoholic extract. MCPP—mixture of three main constituents in Zijuan Pu’er tea water extract. Nrf2—nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related pGSK-3β—phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3β. ROS—reactive oxygen species. skn-1—skinhead 1. ZTWE—Zijuan Pu’er tea water extract.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
19 of 33
Caffeine alone was investigated only in one study on nematodes [161]. The effect
of caffeine treatment in higher concentrations (0.2 mM or 0.4 mM) was weaker than the
effect of Ilex paraguariensis hydroalcoholic extract (IPHE) containing lower concentrations
of caffeine (41 or 87 µM). IPHE and caffeine reduced Aβ mRNA levels, decreased AChE
activity, increased expression of hsp-16.2 (chaperone protein which overexpression causes
suppression of Aβ-toxicity), but also activated DAF-16 signaling (IPHE also HSF-1). It
may suggest that beneﬁcial neuroprotective effects may result from different than caffeine
constituents of IPHE [161]. Decaffeinated extracts from coffee [160] and guarana [158] also
induced some favorable effects in Caenorhabditis elegans.
In conclusion, the studies on nematode models of AD did not allow the effects of
caffeine to be distinguished from those of other constituents of plant extracts [158,160,161].
5.2. In Vitro Studies
Caffeine administered to the culture medium caused an enhanced release of stored
Ca2+ in the in vitro culture of the cortical neurons of 3xTg-AD mice (Table 5). The effect
was not associated with a change in the endoplasmic reticulum store size, defects in the
Ca2+ extrusion mechanism or expression of Ca2+-binding/buffering proteins, but probably
with an increased expression of the RyR [107]. Similar results were obtained in later
studies showing increased calcium signals within dendritic processes induced by RyRs
stimulation by caffeine. The proper regulation of calcium signaling may be important in
the prevention of synapse loss and further cognitive impairment [163]. Beneﬁcial effect of
caffeine treatment was demonstrated in vitro in cultures of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y
cells, to which Aβ was added in order to induce neurotoxicity [164,165]. Caffeine increased
expression of antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 and reduced expression of proapoptotic protein
BAX in the AlCl3-induced and Aβ25–35-induced neurotoxicity in human neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y cells. Caffeine inhibited also the increase of AD-related proteins (APP and
BACE-1) expression in cells exposed to both AlCl3 and Aβ25–35. The effects of caffeine
were similar to those induced by selective A1R or A2AR antagonists, indicating the role of
blockade of both A1R and A2AR. Caffeine reduced also oxidative stress (reducing NF-κB
activity, reducing ROS production, increasing superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and
decreasing MDA concentration) induced by AlCl3 and Aβ25–35. The authors proposed
that combined involvement of A1R and A2AR blockade by caffeine in the neuronal cell
protection is associated with the restoration of Ca2+ homeostasis [164]. In another study,
the neuroprotective activity of caffeine against Aβ-induced neurotoxicity was conﬁrmed in
a neuronal cell line. The effects were shown to result from complex mechanism of caffeine
action—the blockade of A1R and A2AR, direct or indirect blockade of NMDA receptors
and activation of RyRs [165].
Viral delivery of mutated human APP and tau protein to primary rat hippocampal
neurons and rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) caused accelerated neuronal cell death and
morphological damage (more severe effects were observed in tau transduced cultures).
Also, calcium homeostasis dysregulation was observed in APP-EGFP and tau-DsRed2
transduced hippocampal neurons. Moreover, a neurite impairment was demonstrated
in APP-EGFP and tau-DsRed2 transduced DRG neurons. Caffeine treatment prevented
morphological neuronal damage increasing the number of healthy neurons in APP-induced
and tau-induced models [166].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
20 of 33
Table 5. In vitro models.
Model
Caffeine Dose and
Study Conditions
Aim
Effects
Reference
Primary cortical neurons from
12- to 17-day-old cultures from 3xTg
(APPswe, PS1/M146V KI
and tau P301L) mouse embryos
Caffeine: 25 mM
To investigate the effects of
caffeine treatment on disorders
in Ca2+ homeostasis in
the primary cortical neurons
obtained from 3xTg-AD mice,
assessed by microﬂuorimetric
measurements of Ca2+
concentration.
Caffeine treatment increased Ca2+ content in the cortical neurons of
3xTg-AD mice. Caffeine increased release of Ca2+ from
RyR-sensitive Ca2+ stores. Enhanced Ca2+ response to the caffeine
was probably associated with an increased expression of RyRs in the
cortical neurons.
[107]
Prefrontal cortex brain slices
from 3xTg (APPswe, PS1/M146V KI, and tau
P130L) mice
(1- to 3-month-old)
Caffeine: 10 mM
To investigate the relationship between
Ca2+ inﬂux by NMDA receptors and RyR
activation
in 3xTg-AD mice.
Caffeine stimulated RyRs increasing synaptic excitability. RyR and
NMDA receptor activation increased Ca2+ release in 3xTg-AD mice.
[163]
Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
treated with 2 µM Aβ25–35
or 10 µM AlCl3 or combined
Caffeine: 10 µM;
caffeine: 1-100 µM in the cell
viability test
To investigate the role of A1R
and A2AR in the neuroprotective activity
of caffeine in the AlCl3- and
Aβ25–35-induced models of AD
in human SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells.
Neuroprotective effect of caffeine observed in the combined AlCl3-
and Aβ25–35 -induced model of neurotoxicity required a dual
antagonism of A1R and A2AR (probably due to combined
involvement in the restoration of Ca2+ homeostasis). Caffeine
prevented neuronal cell death and exerted antioxidant activity
(reduced ROS production, increased SOD activity and decreased
MDA concentration).
[164]
Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
treated with 20 µM Aβ25–35
Caffeine:
0.6 or 1 mM
To investigate the mechanism
of neuroprotective activity of
caffeine against Aβ-induced
neurotoxicity in the human
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.
Caffeine prevented Aβ-induced toxicity in neuronal cells, which
probably resulted from the blockade of adenosine receptors (A1 and
A2A), blockade of NMDA receptors and activation of RyRs.
[165]
Primary hippocampal neurons from 2- to
5-day-old
Sprague-Dawley rats or
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) from
1- to 4-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats; both
transfected with human APP fused to EGFP
or mutant
h-tau protein fused to DsRed2
Caffeine: 50 µM
To investigate the effects of
caffeine and various drugs
treatment after viral delivery
of mutated APP and h-tau
protein in the primary
hippocampal cells and DRG
cells on the degeneration and
neuronal cell death.
Experiments demonstrated that delivering mutated APP and h-tau
protein accelerated neuronal cell death and morphological damage.
Caffeine administration ameliorated APP-induced and tau-induced
neuronal damage. Caffeine treatment exerted neuroprotective
effects in APP-induced and tau-induced models (prevented
morphological damage in both models, increasing the number of
healthy neurons).
[166]
3xTg—triple-transgenic. A1R—adenosine A1 receptor. A2AR—adenosine A2A receptor. Aβ—amyloid β. AD—Alzheimer’s disease. AlCl3—aluminum chloride. APP—amyloid precursor protein. DRG—
dorsal root ganglion. EGFP—enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein. h-tau—human tau. MDA—malondialdehyde. NMDA—N-methyl-D-aspartate. ROS—reactive oxygen species. RyR—ryanodine receptor.
SOD—superoxide dismutase.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
21 of 33
5.3. In Silico Studies
In silico studies indicated that caffeine may be useful as an anti-amyloidogenic agent
in the prevention of AD [167]. Caffeine was studied in silico as a potential molecule
that destabilizes preformed Aβ protoﬁlaments. The molecular dynamics simulations and
calculations indicated that the mechanism of caffeine action may be associated with the
disruption of inter-chain hydrogen bonds and disorganization of secondary structure con-
formation of Aβ [167]. In another study, molecular dynamic simulations demonstrated
that caffeine inhibited the self-assembly of Aβ oligomerization by interference with the
hydrophobic interaction between Aβ16-22 peptides; the effect was greater when caffeine
concentration in the water solution was higher [168]. In silico studies predicted caffeine
to be a potential AChE inhibitor [169]. An improvement of cholinergic system transmis-
sion was also revealed in silico molecular docking study, where a coffee and green tea
constituent—EGCG inhibited AChE and butyrylcholinesterase [170].
6. Discussion
So far no drugs have been proven to be effective in reversing or stopping AD. Despite
numerous studies having been conducted in recent years, no new drugs have been reg-
istered by the FDA for almost 20 years [171]. Due to the not fully understood, complex
pathomechanism of AD and numerous clinical failures of anti-amyloid and anti-tau drugs,
it is necessary to look at strategies involving modifying factors connected with the style of
life or dietary factors which potentially would counteract the development of neurodegen-
erative changes or delay AD progression. Caffeine, or rather its sources (coffee, tea, yerba
mate), are considered factors which may exert beneﬁcial effects in the AD—prevent the
risk of developing AD and/or delay the progression of AD [81,82].
To investigate the effects of caffeine in AD, numerous studies have been undertaken
on different experimental models. In those studies, caffeine was administered in different
doses. Caffeine was administered in drinking water, in the diet, or once/twice daily p.o. or
i.p. The descriptions of the doses (low, moderate, high) used by authors in their reports
on in vitro and in vivo studies are not unequivocal. Caffeine consumption in humans
differs in a wide range. A low caffeine intake is considered to be below 200 mg/day
(<2.86 mg/kg/day), moderate between 200 and 400 mg/day (2.86–5.71 mg/kg/day) and
high above 400 mg/day (>5.71 mg/kg/day) [8,172]. Based on the body surface area
conversion ratio, the doses administered to humans are converted into animal doses.
Thus, based on the calculations [173], the corresponding rat doses are as follows: low
(<17.7 mg/kg/day), moderate (17.7–35.4 mg/kg/day) and high (>35.4 mg/kg/day).
Equivalent mouse doses under 35.1 mg/kg/day are considered as low, between 35.1
and 70.3 mg/kg/day as moderate and above 70.3 mg/kg/day as high [172–174]. In most of
the issues discussed in the present article about animal studies, caffeine was administered
in doses corresponding to the human doses; the exact doses used in particular experiments
are shown in Tables 1–3.
Generally, experimental studies on caffeine effects in AD demonstrated some ben-
eﬁcial inﬂuence on cognition. Its neuroprotective, antioxidant, anti-inﬂammatory and
antiapoptotic activities in the neuronal tissues, led to alleviation of cognitive impair-
ment [104,119,122,123,128,131–133,136,141–143,155,156,158,160,161,164–166]. Many stud-
ies pointed out on favorable effects of caffeine on the hallmarks of the disease: Aβ or
hyperphosphorylated tau protein [104,117,129,131,134,156,161,162,164–166].
Since the main mechanism of caffeine action is associated with a non-selective blockade
of adenosine receptors (mainly A1R and A2AR), this problem was undertaken in many
studies. In fact, both adenosine receptors (A1R and A2AR) are present in synapses of
glutamatergic, GABAergic, cholinergic, dopaminergic, serotoninergic and noradrenergic
system, and adenosine is involved in neuromodulation of the central nervous system
(CNS) [175]. Adenosine has been shown to reduce the release of various neurotransmitters
including glutamate, ACh, dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline in CNS in experimental
models, whereas caffeine, as an adenosine receptor antagonist, to promote the release [22].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
22 of 33
In fact, the favorable effects of caffeine were shown to result from the blockade of A2AR
(but probably not A1R) in mice with AD induced by Aβ25–35 i.c.v. administration [117], in
Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in the primary cerebral cultures in rats [176] and in STZ-induced
AD in rats [141]. However, A1R may be involved in the protective caffeine activity in
cholesterol-enriched diet-induced AD in rabbits [156]. Moreover, the blockade of both
A1R and A2AR was responsible for beneﬁcial activity of caffeine in in vitro model of
combined neurotoxicity induced by AlCl3 and Aβ25–35 in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y
cells [164] and in scopolamine-induced memory deﬁcit in mice [115]. Dual blockade was
also considered a probable mechanism of caffeine neuroprotective activity in Aβ-induced
toxicity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells [165].
Beneﬁcial effects of caffeine resulting from the blockade of adenosine receptors (A1R
and A2AR) have been conﬁrmed by studies with selective A1R and A2AR antagonists. The
studies with use of selective A2AR antagonists (MSX-3 and SCH58261) demonstrated that
A2AR blockade prevented spatial memory deﬁcits and development of amyloid burden
in the double transgenic APPswe/PS1∆E9 mice [177] and improved synaptic plasticity
deﬁcits in double transgenic APPswe/PS1 mice [178]. Similar favorable effects of selec-
tive A2AR antagonist administration (SCH58261) were observed also in 3xTg (APPswe,
PS1/M146V and tau P301L) mice [179] and in Aβ-induced neurotoxicity and synaptotoxi-
city in rats [120,140]. Deletion of A2AR prevented memory impairment and reduced tau
protein hyperphosphorylation in THY-Tau22 transgenic mice [139]. Similar effects were
observed after caffeine treatment in THY-Tau22 mice [104]. However, SCH58261 did not
favorably affect scopolamine-induced and MK-801-induced acute memory impairment sug-
gesting that selective A2AR antagonist exerts beneﬁcial effects only in slowly progressing
memory impairment related to synaptic deterioration [120]. However, blockade of A2AR
(by a selective antagonist—SCH58261), and also A1R (by a selective antagonist—DPCPX)
led to beneﬁcial effects in a scopolamine-induced model in mice [153], conﬁrming the
effect observed after caffeine treatment in this mice model [115], but inconsistent with
conclusions drawn by other authors [180].
It should be pointed out that the effects of caffeine on adenosine transmission were
not consistent in all studied models. For example, no inﬂuence of caffeine on A1R and
A2AR density was observed in APPswe mice [129]. Moreover, chronic caffeine intake did
not result in persistent up-regulation of A1AR in rat brains excluding this mechanism of
action as the reason for the neuroprotective effect of caffeine in rats [181]. It should be
emphasized that the mechanism of caffeine action on adenosine system is dose-dependent,
since, for example, in mice, acute caffeine intake at lower doses (<50 mg/kg) blocks mostly
A1R and at higher non-toxic doses (<100 mg/kg) A2AR [117].
Although numerous studies indicate that antagonistic effect of caffeine on adenosine
receptors may be responsible for alleviation of memory deﬁcits, it is not the only possible
mechanism of beneﬁcial caffeine action in AD. From among other caffeine mechanisms, the
inhibitory effect on PDEs and agonistic effect on RyRs were investigated in in vitro models
of AD disorders. Caffeine inhibited PDE, restoring the mitochondrial functions in vitro in
mouse N2a-APPswe cells [133]. Activation of RyRs by caffeine led to an increased Ca2+
release from intracellular stores in the cortical cultures from 3xTg-AD mice [107] and in
the hippocampal cultures from normal rats [24]. However, the caffeine doses required to
inhibit PDEs and stimulate the RyRs are not achievable in a normal diet and could exert
toxic effects in humans [9,23,25,26].
Numerous mechanisms of caffeine action, which may be relevant to its favorable
effects in AD models were demonstrated in studies on cell cultures. For example, in vitro
caffeine decreased Aβ level and Aβ1-42 deposition, and reduced BACE-1 activity in human
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells [182], and inhibited oligomerization of Aβ in N2a/APP
cells [183]. Also decreased expression of BACE-1 and APP was demonstrated after caffeine
treatment in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells exposed to AlCl3 and Aβ [164]. In addi-
tion, the beneﬁcial effect of caffeine on Aβ could be associated with antagonism of NMDA
receptors or agonism of RyRs [165]. Moreover, brewed coffee reduced Aβ production

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
23 of 33
by a decrease in BACE-1 expression (which was not associated with caffeine activity) in
human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells [184]. Brewed coffee increased expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)in SH-SY5Y cells, indicating possible neuroprotective
effect [185]. The effects of brewed coffee treatment suggest that the neuroprotective activity
may result not only from caffeine activity, but also from that of other coffee components.
Since AChE inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) currently play the main
role in the treatment of AD, the effects of caffeine on AChE were also studied. In vivo
studies demonstrated weak anticholinesterase activity of caffeine in normal rats [172], in
rats with AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity [143] and in a nematode AD model [161]. In vitro
studies on caffeine and donepezil effects in the rat brain tissue homogenate demonstrated
that both drugs inhibited AChE, whereas the effect was stronger after the combined
treatment (with stronger inhibition at higher caffeine concentration). On the other hand,
in vivo studies did not conﬁrm the augmentation of donepezil anticholinesterase activity
by caffeine, moreover administration of high-dose caffeine with donepezil elevated the
AChE activity [172]. This may suggest adverse effects of high caffeine consumption during
the treatment of AD with AChE inhibitors.
The mechanism of favorable actions of caffeine on AD may be connected with the
reduction of neuroinﬂammation [5,186]. AD and other neurodegenerative diseases are
associated with an increased level of inﬂammation and oxidative stress parameters. Numer-
ous studies showed that caffeine reduced parameters of oxidative stress. Caffeine exerted
antioxidant activity in transgenic [104,131] and non-transgenic rodent models [119,123,143],
a rabbit model [156], and nematode models [158,161] of AD.
Neuroprotective, anti-inﬂammatory and antiapoptotic activity of caffeine demon-
strated in different experimental models of AD in vivo was reﬂected in in vitro studies.
Caffeine exerted antiapoptotic activity in APPswe transgenic mice [128,131] and in the
D-galactose-treated rats [119]. Anti-inﬂammatory effect of caffeine administration was
associated with the reduced level of proinﬂammatory cytokines in THY-Tau22 transgenic
mice [104], in AlCl3-induced neurotoxicity in rats [143] and in the D-galactose-treated
rats [119].
The caffeine effects presented in studies performed in experimental models of AD are
presented in Figure 1.
It must be stated that caffeine shares antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory effects, lead-
ing to neuroprotection, with numerous phenolic compounds, many of them occurring
together with caffeine in its dietary sources (coffee, tea, yerba mate). In fact, crude caffeine
(containing 1% of phenolic acids) exerted stronger favorable effects than pure caffeine [131].
Also, other substances present in coffee or tea like chlorogenic acid [187–190], caffeic
acid [79,189,191], EGCG [3,79], ferulic acid [76] exerted beneﬁcial effects in experimental
models of AD.
It should be pointed out that caffeine did not exert beneﬁcial effects in all experiments
on AD experimental models. Caffeine administration did not favorably affect behavioral
disorders studied in the behavioral tests in 3xTg-AD mice. Intensiﬁcation of BPSD-like
behaviors and anxiety-related behaviors was demonstrated after caffeine treatment in those
mice [135]. The adverse effect of caffeine intake during pregnancy in THY-Tau22 transgenic
rats was demonstrated in the behavioral tests in offspring, in which caffeine accelerated
the occurrence of cognitive deﬁcits [105]. Detrimental effects of caffeine intake rather than
that of other coffee components during pregnancy (low birth weight of infant, increased
risk of pregnancy loss and childhood acute leukemia) was also conﬁrmed in an umbrella
review on the impact of coffee and caffeine on health outcomes [14,16].

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
24 of 33
Figure 1. Caffeine effects reported in studies performed in experimental models of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Aβ—amyloid
β. AChE—acetylcholinesterase. BACE-1—β-site amyloid-precursor-protein-cleaving enzyme-1. BAX—B-cell lymphoma 2-
associated X protein. Bcl-2—B-cell lymphoma protein-2. BDNF—brain-derived neurotrophic factor. CCl—chemokine ligand
factor. DAF-16—abnormal dauer formation 16. EAAT3—excitatory amino acid transporter 3. GABAA—γ-aminobutyric acid
type A receptor. GFAP—glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein. GSH—reduced glutathione. GSH/GSSG ratio—reduced/oxidized
glutathione ratio. IL—interleukin. MDA—malondialdehyde. MnSOD—manganese superoxide dismutase. NF-κB—nuclear
factor-κB. NMDA—N-methyl-D-aspartate. Nrf2—nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2. PDE—phosphodiesterase.
ROS—reactive oxygen species. RyR—ryanodine receptor. skn-1—skinhead 1. SOD—superoxide dismutase. TNF-α—tumor
necrosis factor α. TrkB—tropomyosin-related kinase receptor B.
As was mentioned before, caffeine (as a component of coffee, tea, yerba mate, cola) is
the most widely used psychostimulant [8,23,192,193]. The safety of caffeine consumption
depends on the dose, age, sex and health condition [12,13,194]. Caffeine intake in coffee,
tea, yerba mate, cola and other sources at doses up to 400 mg/day is considered safe
for healthy adults, except pregnant women (<300 mg/day) [14,194]. In children and
adolescents, caffeine consumption up to 2.5 mg/kg/day was not associated with overt
adverse effects [14]. Caffeine intake may negatively affect pregnant women, lactating
women, children, adolescents, people with cardiovascular disorders, people with gastric
and duodenal ulcer disease and smokers [194,195]. Caffeine intake before bedtime is
associated with negative impact on sleep condition, although sleep avoidance and increased
vigilance and arousal may be desirable [14]. The adverse caffeine effects on the behavior
observed at higher doses intake are anxiety, jitteriness and mood disorders [8,13,14,196].
Negative effect of caffeine consumption was demonstrated also in children, including
reduced sleep time, impulsiveness, greater emotional lability and depression [197].
Experimental studies, reviewed in the present article, indicate rather favorable effects
of caffeine in animal models of AD. However, results of such studies may not be fully
relevant to AD in humans. The AD models have been used to investigate many potential

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
25 of 33
drugs that have proven to be effective in the animals, but this has not necessarily been
conﬁrmed in the human studies. Multiple potential disease-modifying drug candidates
(γ-secretase inhibitors, BACE-1 inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, anti-Aβ antibodies, tau
aggregation inhibitors) failed in the further phases of the trials [36,51,52,171,198,199].
The studies on transgenic models were limited to the mouse models. The rat studies,
carried out on non-transgenic models, were less numerous. In many of the experiments
caffeine was administered in drinking water or in the diet, the effect of caffeine used in
bolus doses at regular time intervals, over a certain period of time may be different.
Another limitation of the experimental studies is that most of them were carried out
on male animals (or the animal sex was not stated), whereas human studies indicate that
the effect of caffeine on cognition is sex-dependent [95,200,201]. For example, caffeine
intake was associated with better cognitive performance in older women, but not in
men [202]. On the other hand, the beneﬁcial effects of caffeine consumption were observed
in older men but not in women [200]. Moreover, contradictory conclusions have been
drawn from the analysis of the relationship between the sex-dependent effects of caffeine
consumption on different cognitive outcomes: there was no signiﬁcant association between
caffeine administration and cognitive performance in men; signiﬁcant interaction between
caffeine intake and cognitive performance was observed only in women [95,201]. The
sex-dependent effect of caffeine could result from changes in circulating steroid hormones
or differences in the caffeine metabolism (probably resulting from higher xanthine oxidase
activity in women) in female and male organisms [95,200].
7. Conclusions
In conclusion, the studies carried out on experimental models generally support the
notion that dietary caffeine consumption may exert some beneﬁcial effects in AD. However,
further studies are necessary to elucidate the role of caffeine in the effects of its sources on
cognition and possibly AD risk.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.F. and P.L.; writing—original draft preparation, P.L.,
M.Z., B.K., A.T. and J.F.; writing—review and editing, P.L. and J.F.; supervision, J.F. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The article was partially prepared by the members of Student Scientific Circle in
the Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences in Sosnowiec (M.Z., B.K. and A.T.).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Lashley, T.; Schott, J.M.; Weston, P.; Murray, C.E.; Wellington, H.; Keshavan, A.; Foti, S.C.; Foiani, M.; Toombs, J.; Rohrer, J.D.; et al.
Molecular biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease: Progress and prospects. Dis. Model. Mech. 2018, 11, dmm031781. [CrossRef]
2.
Wightman, E.L. Potential beneﬁts of phytochemicals against Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2017, 76, 106–112. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3.
Andrade, S.; Ramalho, M.J.; Loureiro, J.A.; do Carmo Pereira, M. Natural compounds for Alzheimer’s disease therapy: A
systematic review of preclinical and clinical studies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 2313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Howes, M.-J.R.; Perry, N.S.L.; Vásquez-Londoño, C.; Perry, E.K. Role of phytochemicals as nutraceuticals for cognitive functions
affected in ageing. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 177, 1294–1315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Szczechowiak, K.; Diniz, B.S.; Leszek, J. Diet and Alzheimer’s dementia—Nutritional approach to modulate inﬂammation.
Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 2019, 184, 172743. [CrossRef]
6.
Scarmeas, N.; Anastasiou, C.A.; Yannakoulia, M. Nutrition and prevention of cognitive impairment. Lancet Neurol. 2018, 17,
1006–1015. [CrossRef]
7.
Habtemariam, S. Natural products in Alzheimer’s disease therapy: Would old therapeutic approaches ﬁx the broken promise of
modern medicines? Molecules 2019, 24, 1519. [CrossRef]
8.
Cappelletti, S.; Piacentino, D.; Sani, G.; Aromatario, M. Caffeine: Cognitive and physical performance enhancer or psychoactive
drug? Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2015, 13, 71–88. [CrossRef]
9.
Fredholm, B.B.; Bättig, K.; Holmén, J.; Nehlig, A.; Zvartau, E.E. Actions of caffeine in the brain with special reference to factors
that contribute to its widespread use. Pharmacol. Rev. 1999, 51, 83–133.

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
26 of 33
10.
Ashihara, H.; Kato, M.; Crozier, A. Distribution, biosynthesis and catabolism of methylxanthines in plants. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol.
2011, 200, 11–31. [CrossRef]
11.
Reyes, C.M.; Cornelis, M.C. Caffeine in the diet: Country-level consumption and guidelines. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1772. [CrossRef]
12.
Verster, J.C.; Koenig, J. Caffeine intake and its sources: A review of national representative studies. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2018,
58, 1250–1259. [CrossRef]
13.
EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies). Scientiﬁc opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA J.
2015, 13, 4102. [CrossRef]
14.
Wikoff, D.; Welsh, B.T.; Henderson, R.; Brorby, G.P.; Britt, J.; Myers, E.; Goldberger, J.; Lieberman, H.R.; O’Brien, C.; Peck, J.; et al.
Systematic review of the potential adverse effects of caffeine consumption in healthy adults, pregnant women, adolescents, and
children. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2017, 109, 585–648. [CrossRef]
15.
Poole, R.; Kennedy, O.J.; Roderick, P.; Fallowﬁeld, J.A.; Hayes, P.C.; Parkes, J. Coffee consumption and health: Umbrella review of
meta-analyses of multiple health outcomes. BMJ 2017, 359, j5024. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Grosso, G.; Godos, J.; Galvano, F.; Giovannucci, E.L. Coffee, caffeine, and health outcomes: An umbrella review. Annu. Rev. Nutr.
2017, 37, 131–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Eskelinen, M.H.; Ngandu, T.; Tuomilehto, J.; Soininen, H.; Kivipelto, M. Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the risk of late-life
dementia: A population-based CAIDE study. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2009, 16, 85–91. [CrossRef]
18.
Maia, L.; de Mendonça, A. Does caffeine intake protect from Alzheimer’s disease? Eur. J. Neurol. 2002, 9, 377–382. [CrossRef]
19.
Hussain, A.; Tabrez, E.S.; Mavrych, V.; Bolgova, O.; Peela, J.R. Caffeine: A potential protective agent against cognitive decline in
Alzheimer’s disease. Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Expr. 2018, 28, 67–72. [CrossRef]
20.
Chen, J.-F.; Chern, Y. Impacts of methylxanthines and adenosine receptors on neurodegeneration: Human and experimental
studies. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 2011, 200, 267–310. [CrossRef]
21.
Alasmari, F. Caffeine induces neurobehavioral effects through modulating neurotransmitters. Saudi Pharm. J. 2020, 28, 445–451.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
McLellan, T.M.; Caldwell, J.A.; Lieberman, H.R. A review of caffeine’s effects on cognitive, physical and occupational performance.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2016, 71, 294–312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Kolahdouzan, M.; Hamadeh, M.J. The neuroprotective effects of caffeine in neurodegenerative diseases. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 2017,
23, 272–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Isokawa, M. Caffeine-induced suppression of GABAergic inhibition and calcium-independent metaplasticity. Neural Plast. 2016,
2016, 1239629. [CrossRef]
25.
Simonin, C.; Duru, C.; Salleron, J.; Hincker, P.; Charles, P.; Delval, A.; Youssov, K.; Burnouf, S.; Azulay, J.-P.; Verny, C.; et al.
Association between caffeine intake and age at onset in Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 2013, 58, 179–182. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
26.
Ribeiro, J.A.; Sebastião, A.M. Caffeine and adenosine. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2010, 20, S3–S15. [CrossRef]
27.
Yang, J.Y.; Yang, G.; Ren, J.; Zhao, J.; Li, S. Caffeine suppresses GABA receptor-mediated current in rat primary sensory neurons
via inhibition of intracellular phosphodiesterase. Neurophysiology 2015, 47, 108–114. [CrossRef]
28.
Kaczmarczyk-Sedlak, I.; Folwarczna, J.; Sedlak, L.; Zych, M.; Wojnar, W.; Szumi´nska, I.; Wygl˛edowska-Promie´nska, D.; Mrukwa-
Kominek, E. Effect of caffeine on biomarkers of oxidative stress in lenses of rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes. Arch. Med.
Sci. 2019, 15, 1073–1080. [CrossRef]
29.
Paiva, C.; Beserra, B.; Reis, C.; Dorea, J.G.; Da Costa, T.; Amato, A.A. Consumption of coffee or caffeine and serum concentration
of inﬂammatory markers: A systematic review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 59, 652–663. [CrossRef]
30.
Zampelas, A.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Pitsavos, C.; Chrysohoou, C.; Stefanadis, C. Associations between coffee consumption and
inﬂammatory markers in healthy persons: The ATTICA study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 80, 862–867. [CrossRef]
31.
Alzheimer’s Association. 2015 Alzheimer’s disease facts and ﬁgures. Alzheimers Dement. 2015, 11, 332–384. [CrossRef]
32.
Soto-Rojas, L.O.; de la Cruz-López, F.; Torres, M.A.O.; Viramontes-Pintos, A.; del Cárdenas-Aguayo, M.C.; Meraz-Ríos, M.A.;
Salinas-Lara, C.; Florán-Garduño, B.; Luna-Muñoz, J. Neuroinﬂammation and alteration of the blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s
disease. In Alzheimer’s Disease—Challenges for the Future; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2015.
33.
Pini, L.; Pievani, M.; Bocchetta, M.; Altomare, D.; Bosco, P.; Cavedo, E.; Galluzzi, S.; Marizzoni, M.; Frisoni, G.B. Brain atrophy in
Alzheimer’s disease and aging. Aging Res. Rev. 2016, 30, 25–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Cerejeira, J.; Lagarto, L.; Mukaetova-Ladinska, E.B. Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. Front. Neurol. 2012, 3,
73. [CrossRef]
35.
Zhang, L.; Chen, C.; Mak, M.S.; Lu, J.; Wu, Z.; Chen, Q.; Han, Y.; Li, Y.; Pi, R. Advance of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease animal
models. Med. Res. Rev. 2020, 40, 431–458. [CrossRef]
36.
Atri, A. Current and future treatments in Alzheimer’s disease. Semin. Neurol. 2019, 39, 227–240. [CrossRef]
37.
Drummond, E.; Wisniewski, T. Alzheimer’s disease: Experimental models and reality. Acta Neuropathol. 2017, 133, 155–175.
[CrossRef]
38.
Morley, J.E.; Farr, S.A.; Nguyen, A.D. Alzheimer disease. Clin. Geriatr. Med. 2018, 34, 591–601. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Cavanaugh, S.E.; Pippin, J.J.; Barnard, N.D. Animal models of Alzheimer disease: Historical pitfalls and a path forward. ALTEX
2014, 31, 279–302. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
27 of 33
40.
Shi, Y.; Holtzman, D.M. Interplay between innate immunity and Alzheimer disease: APOE and TREM2 in the spotlight. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 2018, 18, 759–772. [CrossRef]
41.
Riphagen, J.M.; Ramakers, I.H.G.M.; Freeze, W.M.; Pagen, L.H.G.; Hanseeuw, B.J.; Verbeek, M.M.; Verhey, F.R.J.; Jacobs, H.I.L.
Neurobiology of aging linking APOE-ε4, blood-brain barrier dysfunction, and inﬂammation to Alzheimer’s pathology. Neurobiol.
Aging 2020, 85, 96–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Chen, Y.; Strickland, M.R.; Soranno, A.; Holtzman, D.M. Apolipoprotein E: Structural insights and links to Alzheimer disease
pathogenesis. Neuron 2020, 109, 205–221. [CrossRef]
43.
Reitz, C.; Brayne, C.; Mayeux, R. Epidemiology of Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2011, 7, 137–152. [CrossRef]
44.
Hickman, R.A.; Faustin, A.; Wisniewski, T. Alzheimer disease and its growing epidemic: Risk factors, biomarkers, and the urgent
need for therapeutics. Neurol. Clin. 2016, 34, 941–953. [CrossRef]
45.
Esteves, I.M.; Lopes-Aguiar, C.; Rossignoli, M.T.; Ruggiero, R.N.; Broggini, A.C.S.; Bueno-Junior, L.S.; Kandratavicius, L.;
Monteiro, M.R.; Romcy-Pereira, R.N.; Leite, J.P. Chronic nicotine attenuates behavioral and synaptic plasticity impairments in a
streptozotocin model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 2017, 353, 87–97. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
de la Monte, S.M.; Tong, M.; Wands, J.R. The 20-year voyage aboard the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease: Docking at “type
3 diabetes”, environmental/exposure factors, pathogenic mechanisms, and potential treatments. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2018, 62,
1381–1390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Lester-Coll, N.; Rivera, E.J.; Soscia, S.J.; Doiron, K.; Wands, J.R.; de la Monte, S.M. Intracerebral streptozotocin model of type 3
diabetes: Relevance to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2006, 9, 13–33. [CrossRef]
48.
Cheignon, C.; Tomas, M.; Bonnefont-Rousselot, D.; Faller, P.; Hureau, C.; Collin, F. Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta peptide
in Alzheimer’s disease. Redox Biol. 2018, 14, 450–464. [CrossRef]
49.
Sadigh-Eteghad, S.; Sabermarouf, B.; Majdi, A.; Talebi, M.; Farhoudi, M.; Mahmoudi, J. Amyloid-beta: A crucial factor in
Alzheimer’s disease. Med. Princ. Pract. 2015, 24, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Anand, A.; Patience, A.A.; Sharma, N.; Khurana, N. The present and future of pharmacotherapy of Alzheimer’s disease: A
comprehensive review. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2017, 815, 364–375. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Jouanne, M.; Rault, S.; Voisin-Chiret, A.-S. Tau protein aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease: An attractive target for the develop-
ment of novel therapeutic agents. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2017, 139, 153–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Du, X.; Wang, X.; Geng, M. Alzheimer’s disease hypothesis and related therapies. Transl. Neurodegener. 2018, 7, 2. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53.
Heneka, M.T.; Carson, M.J.; El Khoury, J.; Landreth, G.E.; Brosseron, F.; Feinstein, D.L.; Jacobs, A.H.; Wyss-Coray, T.; Vitorica, J.;
Ransohoff, R.M.; et al. Neuroinﬂammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 2015, 14, 388–405. [CrossRef]
54.
Calsolaro, V.; Edison, P. Neuroinﬂammation in Alzheimer’s disease: Current evidence and future directions. Alzheimers Dement.
2016, 12, 719–732. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Hampel, H.; Mesulam, M.-M.; Cuello, A.C.; Farlow, M.R.; Giacobini, E.; Grossberg, G.T.; Khachaturian, A.S.; Vergallo, A.; Cavedo,
E.; Snyder, P.J.; et al. The cholinergic system in the pathophysiology and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2018, 141,
1917–1933. [CrossRef]
56.
Ferreira-Vieira, T.H.; Guimaraes, I.M.; Silva, F.R.; Ribeiro, F.M. Alzheimer’s disease: Targeting the cholinergic system. Curr.
Neuropharmacol. 2016, 14, 101–115. [CrossRef]
57.
Cellai, L.; Carvalho, K.; Faivre, E.; Deleau, A.; Vieau, D.; Buée, L.; Blum, D.; Mériaux, C.; Gomez-Murcia, V. The adenosinergic
signaling: A complex but promising therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 2018, 12, 520. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
58.
Rahman, A. The role of adenosine in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2009, 7, 207–216. [CrossRef]
59.
Wang, R.; Reddy, P.H. Role of glutamate and NMDA receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2017, 57, 1041–1048.
[CrossRef]
60.
Danysz, W.; Parsons, C.G. Alzheimer’s disease, β-amyloid, glutamate, NMDA receptors and memantine—Searching for the
connections. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2012, 167, 324–352. [CrossRef]
61.
Takahashi, R.N.; Pamplona, F.A.; Prediger, R.D.S. Adenosine receptor antagonists for cognitive dysfunction: A review of animal
studies. Front. Biosci. 2008, 13, 2614–2632. [CrossRef]
62.
Cie´slak, M.; Wojtczak, A. Role of purinergic receptors in the Alzheimer’s disease. Purinergic Signal. 2018, 14, 331–344. [CrossRef]
63.
Liu, K.Y.; Stringer, A.E.; Reeves, S.J.; Howard, R.J. The neurochemistry of agitation in Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review.
Aging Res. Rev. 2018, 43, 99–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Beam, C.R.; Kaneshiro, C.; Jang, J.Y.; Reynolds, C.A.; Pedersen, N.L.; Gatz, M. Differences between women and men in incidence
rates of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2018, 64, 1077–1083. [CrossRef]
65.
Podcasy, J.L.; Epperson, C.N. Considering sex and gender in Alzheimer disease and other dementias. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci.
2016, 18, 437–446. [CrossRef]
66.
Ferretti, M.T.; Iulita, M.F.; Cavedo, E.; Chiesa, P.A.; Dimech, A.S.; Chadha, A.S.; Baracchi, F.; Girouard, H.; Misoch, S.; Giacobini,
E.; et al. Sex differences in Alzheimer disease—The gateway to precision medicine. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2018, 14, 457–469. [CrossRef]
67.
Mazure, C.M.; Swendsen, J. Sex differences in Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Lancet Neurol. 2016, 15, 451–452.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
28 of 33
68.
Long, J.M.; Holtzman, D.M. Alzheimer disease: An update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell 2019, 179, 312–339.
[CrossRef]
69.
Weller, J.; Budson, A. Current understanding of Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and treatment. F1000Research 2018, 7, F1000
Faculty Rev-1161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
McShane, R.; Westby, M.J.; Roberts, E.; Minakaran, N.; Schneider, L.; Farrimond, L.E.; Maayan, N.; Ware, J.; Debarros, J.
Memantine for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2019, 3, CD003154. [CrossRef]
71.
Rosini, M.; Simoni, E.; Caporaso, R.; Basagni, F.; Catanzaro, M.; Abu, I.F.; Fagiani, F.; Fusco, F.; Masuzzo, S.; Albani, D.; et al.
Merging memantine and ferulic acid to probe connections between NMDA receptors, oxidative stress and amyloid-β peptide in
Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2019, 180, 111–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Bhat, A.; Mahalakshmi, A.M.; Ray, B.; Tuladhar, S.; Hediyal, T.A.; Manthiannem, E.; Padamati, J.; Chandra, R.; Chidambaram,
S.B.; Sakharkar, M.K. Beneﬁts of curcumin in brain disorders. Biofactors 2019, 45, 666–689. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Farkhondeh, T.; Samarghandian, S.; Pourbagher-Shahri, A.M.; Sedaghat, M. The impact of curcumin and its modiﬁed formulations
on Alzheimer’s disease. J. Cell. Physiol. 2019, 234, 16953–16965. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Chen, M.; Du, Z.-Y.; Zheng, X.; Li, D.-L.; Zhou, R.-P.; Zhang, K. Use of curcumin in diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen. Res. 2018, 13, 742–752. [CrossRef]
75.
Mori, T.; Koyama, N.; Tan, J.; Segawa, T.; Maeda, M.; Town, T. Combination therapy with octyl gallate and ferulic acid improves
cognition and neurodegeneration in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Biol. Chem. 2017, 292, 11310–11325.
[CrossRef]
76.
Sgarbossa, A.; Giacomazza, D.; di Carlo, M. Ferulic acid: A hope for Alzheimer’s disease therapy from plants. Nutrients 2015, 7,
5764–5782. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Meng, G.; Meng, X.; Ma, X.; Zhang, G.; Hu, X.; Jin, A.; Zhao, Y.; Liu, X. Application of ferulic acid for Alzheimer’s disease:
Combination of text mining and experimental validation. Front. Neuroinform. 2018, 12, 31. [CrossRef]
78.
He, M.; Zhao, L.; Wei, M.-J.; Yao, W.-F.; Zhao, H.-S.; Chen, F.-J. Neuroprotective effects of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate on aging
mice induced by D-galactose. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2009, 32, 55–60. [CrossRef]
79.
Polito, C.A.; Cai, Z.-Y.; Shi, Y.-L.; Li, X.-M.; Yang, R.; Shi, M.; Li, Q.-S.; Ma, S.-C.; Xiang, L.-P.; Wang, K.-R.; et al. Association of tea
consumption with risk of Alzheimer’s disease and anti-beta-amyloid effects of tea. Nutrients 2018, 10, 655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Cascella, M.; Bimonte, S.; Muzio, M.R.; Schiavone, V.; Cuomo, A. The efﬁcacy of Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (green tea) in the
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: An overview of pre-clinical studies and translational perspectives in clinical practice. Infect.
Agent. Cancer 2017, 12, 36. [CrossRef]
81.
Oñatibia-Astibia, A.; Franco, R.; Martínez-Pinilla, E. Health beneﬁts of methylxanthines in neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Nutr.
Food Res. 2017, 61, 1600670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Panza, F.; Solfrizzi, V.; Barulli, M.R.; Bonﬁglio, C.; Guerra, V.; Osella, A.; Seripa, D.; Sabbà, C.; Pilotto, A.; Logroscino, G. Coffee,
tea, and caffeine consumption and prevention of late-life cognitive decline and dementia: A systematic review. J. Nutr. Health
Aging 2015, 19, 313–328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Flaten, V.; Laurent, C.; Coelho, J.E.; Sandau, U.; Batalha, V.L.; Burnouf, S.; Hamdane, M.; Humez, S.; Boison, D.; Lopes, L.V.; et al.
From epidemiology to pathophysiology: What about caffeine in Alzheimer’s disease? Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2014, 42, 587–592.
[CrossRef]
84.
Kim, Y.-S.; Kwak, S.M.; Myung, S.-K. Caffeine intake from coffee or tea and cognitive disorders: A meta-analysis of observational
studies. Neuroepidemiology 2015, 44, 51–63. [CrossRef]
85.
Wierzejska, R. Can coffee consumption lower the risk of Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease? A literature review. Arch.
Med. Sci. 2017, 13, 507–514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Kakutani, S.; Watanabe, H.; Murayama, N. Green tea intake and risks for dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive
impairment, and cognitive impairment: A systematic review. Nutrients 2019, 11, 1165. [CrossRef]
87.
Ma, Q.-P.; Huang, C.; Cui, Q.-Y.; Yang, D.-J.; Sun, K.; Chen, X.; Li, X.-H. Meta-analysis of the association between tea intake and
the risk of cognitive disorders. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0165861. [CrossRef]
88.
Wu, L.; Sun, D.; He, Y. Coffee intake and the incident risk of cognitive disorders: A dose–response meta-analysis of nine
prospective cohort studies. Clin. Nutr. 2017, 36, 730–736. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Liu, Q.-P.; Wu, Y.-F.; Cheng, H.-Y.; Xia, T.; Ding, H.; Wang, H.; Wang, Z.-M.; Xu, Y. Habitual coffee consumption and risk of
cognitive decline/dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Nutrition 2016, 32, 628–636.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Larsson, S.C.; Orsini, N. Coffee consumption and risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: A dose-response meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1501. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Zhou, A.; Taylor, A.E.; Karhunen, V.; Zhan, Y.; Rovio, S.P.; Lahti, J.; Sjögren, P.; Byberg, L.; Lyall, D.M.; Auvinen, J.; et al. Habitual
coffee consumption and cognitive function: A Mendelian randomization meta-analysis in up to 415530 participants. Sci. Rep.
2018, 8, 7526. [CrossRef]
92.
Larsson, S.C.; Traylor, M.; Malik, R.; Dichgans, M.; Burgess, S.; Markus, H.S.; CoSTREAM Consortium, on behalf of the
International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project. Modiﬁable pathways in Alzheimer’s disease: Mendelian randomisation analysis.
BMJ 2017, 359, j5375. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
29 of 33
93.
Schuster, J.; Mitchell, E.S. More than just caffeine: Psychopharmacology of methylxanthine interactions with plant-derived
phytochemicals. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 2019, 89, 263–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Colombo, R.; Papetti, A. An outlook on the role of decaffeinated coffee in neurodegenerative diseases. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr.
2020, 60, 760–779. [CrossRef]
95.
Dong, X.; Li, S.; Sun, J.; Li, Y.; Zhang, D. Association of coffee, decaffeinated coffee and caffeine intake from coffee with cognitive
performance in older adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2011–2014. Nutrients 2020, 12, 840.
[CrossRef]
96.
Newman, M.; Kretzschmar, D.; Khan, I.; Chen, M.; Verdile, G.; Lardelli, M. Animal models of Alzheimer’s disease. In Animal
Models for the Study of Human Disease, 2nd ed.; Michael Conn, P., Ed.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA, USA, 2017; pp. 1031–1085.
97.
Do Carmo, S.; Cuello, A.C. Modeling Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic rats. Mol. Neurodegener. 2013, 8, 37. [CrossRef]
98.
Esquerda-Canals, G.; Montoliu-Gaya, L.; Güell-Bosch, J.; Villegas, S. Mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis.
2017, 57, 1171–1183. [CrossRef]
99.
Echeverria, V.; Ducatenzeiler, A.; Alhonen, L.; Janne, J.; Grant, S.M.; Wandosell, F.; Muro, A.; Baralle, F.; Li, H.; Duff, K.; et al. Rat
transgenic models with a phenotype of intracellular Aβ accumulation in hippocampus and cortex. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2004, 6,
209–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Puzzo, D.; Gulisano, W.; Palmeri, A.; Arancio, O. Rodent models for Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery. Expert Opin. Drug
Discov. 2015, 10, 703–711. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Sun, L.; Zhou, R.; Yang, G.; Shi, Y. Analysis of 138 pathogenic mutations in presenilin-1 on the in vitro production of Aβ42 and
Aβ40 peptides by γ-secretase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, E476–E485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Andorfer, C.; Kress, Y.; Espinoza, M.; de Silva, R.; Tucker, K.L.; Barde, Y.-A.; Duff, K.; Davies, P. Hyperphosphorylation and
aggregation of tau in mice expressing normal human tau isoforms. J. Neurochem. 2003, 86, 582–590. [CrossRef]
103. Van der Jeugd, A.; Vermaercke, B.; Derisbourg, M.; Lo, A.C.; Hamdane, M.; Blum, D.; Buée, L.; D’Hooge, R. Progressive
age-related cognitive decline in tau mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2013, 37, 777–788. [CrossRef]
104. Laurent, C.; Eddarkaoui, S.; Derisbourg, M.; Leboucher, A.; Demeyer, D.; Carrier, S.; Schneider, M.; Hamdane, M.; Müller, C.E.;
Buée, L.; et al. Beneﬁcial effects of caffeine in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease-like tau pathology. Neurobiol. Aging 2014,
35, 2079–2090. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Zappettini, S.; Faivre, E.; Ghestem, A.; Carrier, S.; Buée, L.; Blum, D.; Esclapez, M.; Bernard, C. Caffeine consumption during
pregnancy accelerates the development of cognitive deﬁcits in offspring in a model of tauopathy. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2019, 13,
438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Stover, K.R.; Campbell, M.A.; Van Winssen, C.M.; Brown, R.E. Early detection of cognitive deﬁcits in the 3xTg-AD mouse model
of Alzheimer’s disease. Behav. Brain Res. 2015, 289, 29–38. [CrossRef]
107. Smith, I.F.; Hitt, B.; Green, K.N.; Oddo, S.; LaFerla, F.M. Enhanced caffeine-induced Ca2+ release in the 3xTg-AD mouse model of
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurochem. 2005, 94, 1711–1718. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Oakley, H.; Cole, S.L.; Logan, S.; Maus, E.; Shao, P.; Craft, J.; Guillozet-Bongaarts, A.; Ohno, M.; Disterhoft, J.; Van Eldik, L.;
et al. Intraneuronal β-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with ﬁve familial Alzheimer’s
disease mutations: Potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J. Neurosci. 2006, 26, 10129–10140. [CrossRef]
109. Cohen, R.M.; Rezai-Zadeh, K.; Weitz, T.M.; Rentsendorj, A.; Gate, D.; Spivak, I.; Bholat, Y.; Vasilevko, V.; Glabe, C.G.; Breunig, J.J.;
et al. A transgenic Alzheimer rat with plaques, tau pathology, behavioral impairment, oligomeric aβ, and frank neuronal loss.
J. Neurosci. 2013, 33, 6245–6256. [CrossRef]
110. Smith, L.A.; McMahon, L.L. Deﬁcits in synaptic function occur at medial perforant path-dentate granule cell synapses prior to
Schaffer collateral-CA1 pyramidal cell synapses in the novel TgF344-Alzheimer’s disease rat model. Neurobiol. Dis. 2018, 110,
166–179. [CrossRef]
111. Lopez, E.M.; Bell, K.F.S.; Ribeiro-da-Silva, A.; Cuello, A.C. Early changes in neurons of the hippocampus and neocortex in
transgenic rats expressing intracellular human a-β. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2004, 6, 421–431, discussion 443–449. [CrossRef]
112. Van Dam, D.; De Deyn, P.P. Animal models in the drug discovery pipeline for Alzheimer’s disease. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2011, 164,
1285–1300. [CrossRef]
113. Cao, Z.; Wang, F.; Xiu, C.; Zhang, J.; Li, Y. Hypericum perforatum extract attenuates behavioral, biochemical, and neurochemical
abnormalities in Aluminum chloride-induced Alzheimer’s disease rats. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2017, 91, 931–937. [CrossRef]
114. McDonald, M.P.; Overmier, J.B. Present imperfect: A critical review of animal models of the mnemonic impairments in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 1998, 22, 99–120. [CrossRef]
115. Botton, P.H.; Costa, M.S.; Ardais, A.P.; Mioranzza, S.; Souza, D.O.; da Rocha, J.B.T.; Porciúncula, L.O. Caffeine prevents disruption
of memory consolidation in the inhibitory avoidance and novel object recognition tasks by scopolamine in adult mice. Behav.
Brain Res. 2010, 214, 254–259. [CrossRef]
116. Nazem, A.; Sankowski, R.; Bacher, M.; Al-Abed, Y. Rodent models of neuroinﬂammation for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinﬂamm.
2015, 12, 74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Dall’Igna, O.P.; Fett, P.; Gomes, M.W.; Souza, D.O.; Cunha, R.A.; Lara, D.R. Caffeine and adenosine A(2a) receptor antagonists
prevent β-amyloid (25–35)-induced cognitive deﬁcits in mice. Exp. Neurol. 2007, 203, 241–245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
30 of 33
118. Salkovic-Petrisic, M.; Knezovic, A.; Hoyer, S.; Riederer, P. What have we learned from the streptozotocin-induced animal model
of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, about the therapeutic strategies in Alzheimer’s research. J. Neural Transm. 2013, 120, 233–252.
[CrossRef]
119. Ullah, F.; Ali, T.; Ullah, N.; Kim, M.O. Caffeine prevents d-galactose-induced cognitive deﬁcits, oxidative stress, neuroinﬂamma-
tion and neurodegeneration in the adult rat brain. Neurochem. Int. 2015, 90, 114–124. [CrossRef]
120. Cunha, G.M.A.; Canas, P.M.; Melo, C.S.; Hockemeyer, J.; Müller, C.E.; Oliveira, C.R.; Cunha, R.A. Adenosine A2A receptor
blockade prevents memory dysfunction caused by β-amyloid peptides but not by scopolamine or MK-801. Exp. Neurol. 2008, 210,
776–781. [CrossRef]
121. Gulyaeva, N.V.; Bobkova, N.V.; Kolosova, N.G.; Samokhin, A.N.; Stepanichev, M.Y.; Stefanova, N.A. Molecular and cellular
mechanisms of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: Studies on rodent models in vivo. Biochemistry 2017, 82, 1088–1102. [CrossRef]
122. Brothers, H.M.; Marchalant, Y.; Wenk, G.L. Caffeine attenuates lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinﬂammation. Neurosci. Lett.
2010, 480, 97–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Badshah, H.; Ikram, M.; Ali, W.; Ahmad, S.; Hahm, J.R.; Kim, M.O. Caffeine may abrogate LPS-induced oxidative stress and
neuroinﬂammation by regulating Nrf2/TLR4 in adult mouse brains. Biomolecules 2019, 9, 719. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Zakaria, R.; Wan Yaacob, W.M.; Othman, Z.; Long, I.; Ahmad, A.H.; Al-Rahbi, B. Lipopolysaccharide-induced memory impairment
in rats: A model of Alzheimer’s disease. Physiol. Res. 2017, 66, 553–565. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Stefanova, N.A.; Muraleva, N.A.; Korbolina, E.E.; Kiseleva, E.; Maksimova, K.Y.; Kolosova, N.G. Amyloid accumulation is a late
event in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in nontransgenic rats. Oncotarget 2015, 6, 1396–1413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Stefanova, N.A.; Kozhevnikova, O.S.; Vitovtov, A.O.; Maksimova, K.Y.; Logvinov, S.V.; Rudnitskaya, E.A.; Korbolina, E.E.;
Muraleva, N.A.; Kolosova, N.G. Senescence-accelerated OXYS rats: A model of age-related cognitive decline with relevance to
abnormalities in Alzheimer disease. Cell Cycle 2014, 13, 898–909. [CrossRef]
127. Chen, W.N.; Yeong, K.Y. Scopolamine, a toxin-induced experimental model, used for research in Alzheimer’s disease. CNS Neurol.
Disord. Drug Targets 2020, 19, 85–93. [CrossRef]
128. Zeitlin, R.; Patel, S.; Burgess, S.; Arendash, G.W.; Echeverria, V. Caffeine induces beneﬁcial changes in PKA signaling and JNK
and ERK activities in the striatum and cortex of Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Brain Res. 2011, 1417, 127–136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Arendash, G.W.; Schleif, W.; Rezai-Zadeh, K.; Jackson, E.K.; Zacharia, L.C.; Cracchiolo, J.R.; Shippy, D.; Tan, J. Caffeine protects
Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment and reduces brain β-amyloid production. Neuroscience 2006, 142, 941–952.
[CrossRef]
130. Arendash, G.W.; Mori, T.; Cao, C.; Mamcarz, M.; Runfeldt, M.; Dickson, A.; Rezai-Zadeh, K.; Tan, J.; Citron, B.A.; Lin, X.; et al.
Caffeine reverses cognitive impairment and decreases brain amyloid-β levels in aged Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Alzheimers Dis.
2009, 17, 661–680. [CrossRef]
131. Chu, Y.-F.; Chang, W.-H.; Black, R.M.; Liu, J.-R.; Sompol, P.; Chen, Y.; Wei, H.; Zhao, Q.; Cheng, I.H. Crude caffeine reduces
memory impairment and amyloid β(1–42) levels in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. Food Chem. 2012, 135, 2095–2102. [CrossRef]
132. Han, K.; Jia, N.; Li, J.; Yang, L.; Min, L.-Q. Chronic caffeine treatment reverses memory impairment and the expression of brain
BNDF and TrkB in the PS1/APP double transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Med. Rep. 2013, 8, 737–740.
[CrossRef]
133. Dragicevic, N.; Delic, V.; Cao, C.; Copes, N.; Lin, X.; Mamcarz, M.; Wang, L.; Arendash, G.W.; Bradshaw, P.C. Caffeine increases
mitochondrial function and blocks melatonin signaling to mitochondria in Alzheimer’s mice and cells. Neuropharmacology 2012,
63, 1368–1379. [CrossRef]
134. Cao, C.; Cirrito, J.R.; Lin, X.; Wang, L.; Verges, D.K.; Dickson, A.; Mamcarz, M.; Zhang, C.; Mori, T.; Arendash, G.W.; et al. Caffeine
suppresses β-amyloid levels in plasma and brain of Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2009, 17, 681–697. [CrossRef]
135. Baeta-Corral, R.; Johansson, B.; Giménez-Llort, L. Long-term treatment with low-dose caffeine worsens BPSD-like proﬁle in
3xTg-AD mice model of Alzheimer’s disease and affects mice with normal aging. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, 79. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
136. Cao, C.; Wang, L.; Lin, X.; Mamcarz, M.; Zhang, C.; Bai, G.; Nong, J.; Sussman, S.; Arendash, G. Caffeine synergizes with another
coffee component to increase plasma GCSF: Linkage to cognitive beneﬁts in Alzheimer’s mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2011, 25, 323–335.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Götz, J.; Streffer, J.R.; David, D.; Schild, A.; Hoerndli, F.; Pennanen, L.; Kurosinski, P.; Chen, F. Transgenic animal models of
Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders: Histopathology, behavior and therapy. Mol. Psychiatry 2004, 9, 664–683. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
138. Chu, Y.-F.; Chen, Y.; Brown, P.H.; Lyle, B.J.; Black, R.M.; Cheng, I.H.; Ou, B.; Prior, R.L. Bioactivities of crude caffeine: Antioxidant
activity, cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition, and enhanced glucose uptake. Food Chem. 2012, 131, 564–568. [CrossRef]
139. Laurent, C.; Burnouf, S.; Ferry, B.; Batalha, V.L.; Coelho, J.E.; Baqi, Y.; Malik, E.; Mariciniak, E.; Parrot, S.; Van der Jeugd, A.; et al.
A2A adenosine receptor deletion is protective in a mouse model of Tauopathy. Mol. Psychiatry 2016, 21, 97–107. [CrossRef]
140. Canas, P.M.; Porciúncula, L.O.; Cunha, G.M.A.; Silva, C.G.; Machado, N.J.; Oliveira, J.M.A.; Oliveira, C.R.; Cunha, R.A. Adenosine
A2A receptor blockade prevents synaptotoxicity and memory dysfunction caused by β-amyloid peptides via p38 mitogen-
activated protein kinase pathway. J. Neurosci. 2009, 29, 14741–14751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
31 of 33
141. Espinosa, J.; Rocha, A.; Nunes, F.; Costa, M.S.; Schein, V.; Kazlauckas, V.; Kalinine, E.; Souza, D.O.; Cunha, R.A.; Porciúncula,
L.O. Caffeine consumption prevents memory impairment, neuronal damage, and adenosine A2A receptors upregulation in the
hippocampus of a rat model of sporadic dementia. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2013, 34, 509–518. [CrossRef]
142. Ghoneim, F.M.; Khalaf, H.A.; Elsamanoudy, A.Z.; Abo El-Khair, S.M.; Helaly, A.M.N.; Mahmoud, E.-H.M.; Elshafey, S.H. Protec-
tive effect of chronic caffeine intake on gene expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor signaling and the immunoreactivity
of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein and Ki-67 in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 2015, 8, 7710–7728.
143. Hosny, E.N.; Sawie, H.G.; Elhadidy, M.E.; Khadrawy, Y.A. Evaluation of antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory efﬁcacy of caffeine in
rat model of neurotoxicity. Nutr. Neurosci. 2019, 22, 789–796. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Ravelli, K.G.; Rosário, B. dos A.; Camarini, R.; Hernandes, M.S.; Britto, L.R. Intracerebroventricular streptozotocin as a model
of Alzheimer’s disease: Neurochemical and behavioral characterization in mice. Neurotox. Res. 2017, 31, 327–333. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
145. Duarte, J.M.N.; Carvalho, R.A.; Cunha, R.A.; Gruetter, R. Caffeine consumption attenuates neurochemical modiﬁcations in the
hippocampus of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. J. Neurochem. 2009, 111, 368–379. [CrossRef]
146. Al Marshad, R.; Al Khatib, R.; Amer, H.; Al Shammari, M.; Al Otaibi, A.; Al Otaibi, F.; Behbehani, N.; Al Sayed, A.; Al Hoty,
N.; Hassan, Z.; et al. Streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus affects the NMDA receptors: Role of caffeine administration in
enhancing learning, memory and locomotor deﬁcits. Int. J. Health Sci. 2018, 12, 10–17.
147. Song, J. Animal model of Aluminum-induced Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2018, 1091, 113–127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Tang, K.S. The cellular and molecular processes associated with scopolamine-induced memory deﬁcit: A model of Alzheimer’s
biomarkers. Life Sci. 2019, 233, 116695. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Klinkenberg, I.; Blokland, A. The validity of scopolamine as a pharmacological model for cognitive impairment: A review of
animal behavioral studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2010, 34, 1307–1350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. More, S.V.; Kumar, H.; Cho, D.-Y.; Yun, Y.-S.; Choi, D.-K. Toxin-induced experimental models of learning and memory impairment.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016, 17, 1447. [CrossRef]
151. Riedel, W.; Hogervorst, E.; Leboux, R.; Verhey, F.; van Praag, H.; Jolles, J. Caffeine attenuates scopolamine-induced memory
impairment in humans. Psychopharmacology 1995, 122, 158–168. [CrossRef]
152. Lee, H.E.; Jeon, S.J.; Ryu, B.; Park, S.J.; Ko, S.Y.; Lee, Y.; Kim, E.; Lee, S.; Kim, H.; Jang, D.S.; et al. Swertisin, a C-glucosylﬂavone,
ameliorates scopolamine-induced memory impairment in mice with its adenosine A1 receptor antagonistic property. Behav. Brain
Res. 2016, 306, 137–145. [CrossRef]
153. Pagnussat, N.; Almeida, A.S.; Marques, D.M.; Nunes, F.; Chenet, G.C.; Botton, P.H.S.; Mioranzza, S.; Loss, C.M.; Cunha, R.A.;
Porciúncula, L.O. Adenosine A(2A) receptors are necessary and sufﬁcient to trigger memory impairment in adult mice. Br. J.
Pharmacol. 2015, 172, 3831–3845. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Chen, X.; Ghribi, O.; Geiger, J.D. Caffeine protects against disruptions of the blood-brain barrier in animal models of Alzheimer’s
and Parkinson’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2010, 20, S127–S141. [CrossRef]
155. Chen, X.; Gawryluk, J.W.; Wagener, J.F.; Ghribi, O.; Geiger, J.D. Caffeine blocks disruption of blood brain barrier in a rabbit model
of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinﬂamm. 2008, 5, 12. [CrossRef]
156. Prasanthi, J.R.P.; Dasari, B.; Marwarha, G.; Larson, T.; Chen, X.; Geiger, J.D.; Ghribi, O. Caffeine protects against oxidative stress
and Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in rabbit hippocampus induced by cholesterol-enriched diet. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2010,
49, 1212–1220. [CrossRef]
157. Nia, B.V.; Kang, C.; Tran, M.G.; Lee, D.; Murakami, S. Meta analysis of human AlzGene database: Beneﬁts and limitations of
using C. elegans for the study of Alzheimer’s disease and co-morbid conditions. Front. Genet. 2017, 8, 55. [CrossRef]
158. Boasquívis, P.F.; Silva, G.M.M.; Paiva, F.A.; Cavalcanti, R.M.; Nunez, C.V.; de Paula Oliveira, R. Guarana (Paullinia cupana)
extract protects Caenorhabditis elegans models for Alzheimer disease and Huntington disease through activation of antioxidant
and protein degradation pathways. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2018, 2018, 9241308. [CrossRef]
159. Grifﬁn, E.F.; Caldwell, K.A.; Caldwell, G.A. Genetic and pharmacological discovery for Alzheimer’s disease using Caenorhabditis
elegans. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2017, 8, 2596–2606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
160. Dostal, V.; Roberts, C.M.; Link, C.D. Genetic mechanisms of coffee extract protection in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of
β-amyloid peptide toxicity. Genetics 2010, 186, 857–866. [CrossRef]
161. Machado, M.L.; Arantes, L.P.; da Silveira, T.L.; Zamberlan, D.C.; Cordeiro, L.M.; Obetine, F.B.B.; da Silva, A.F.; da Cruz, I.B.M.;
Soares, F.A.A.; de Oliveira, R.P. Ilex paraguariensis extract provides increased resistance against oxidative stress and protection
against Amyloid beta-induced toxicity compared to caffeine in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nutr. Neurosci. 2019, 1–13. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
162. Du, F.; Zhou, L.; Jiao, Y.; Bai, S.; Wang, L.; Ma, J.; Fu, X. Ingredients in Zijuan Pu’er tea extract alleviate β-amyloid peptide toxicity
in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of Alzheimer’s disease likely through DAF-16. Molecules 2019, 24, 729. [CrossRef]
163. Goussakov, I.; Miller, M.B.; Stutzmann, G.E. NMDA-mediated Ca(2+) inﬂux drives aberrant ryanodine receptor activation in
dendrites of young Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Neurosci. 2010, 30, 12128–12137. [CrossRef]
164. Giunta, S.; Andriolo, V.; Castorina, A. Dual blockade of the A1 and A2A adenosine receptor prevents amyloid beta toxicity in
neuroblastoma cells exposed to aluminum chloride. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2014, 54, 122–136. [CrossRef]
165. Keshavarz, M.; Farrokhi, M.R.; Amiri, A. Caffeine neuroprotective mechanism against β-amyloid neurotoxicity in SHSY5Y cell
line: Involvement of adenosine, ryanodine, and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. Adv. Pharm. Bull. 2017, 7, 579–584. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
32 of 33
166. Stoppelkamp, S.; Bell, H.S.; Palacios-Filardo, J.; Shewan, D.A.; Riedel, G.; Platt, B. In vitro modelling of Alzheimer’s disease:
Degeneration and cell death induced by viral delivery of amyloid and tau. Exp. Neurol. 2011, 229, 226–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Gupta, S.; Dasmahapatra, A.K. Caffeine destabilizes preformed Aβ protoﬁlaments: Insights from all atom molecular dynamics
simulations. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2019, 21, 22067–22080. [CrossRef]
168. Sharma, B.; Paul, S. Action of caffeine as an amyloid inhibitor in the aggregation of Aβ16–22 peptides. J. Phys. Chem. B 2016, 120,
9019–9033. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Kumar, A.; Mehta, V.; Raj, U.; Varadwaj, P.K.; Udayabanu, M.; Yennamalli, R.M.; Singh, T.R. Computational and in-vitro validation
of natural molecules as potential acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and neuroprotective agents. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2019, 16, 116–127.
[CrossRef]
170. Ali, B.; Jamal, Q.M.S.; Shams, S.; Al-Wabel, N.A.; Siddiqui, M.U.; Alzohairy, M.A.; Al Karaawi, M.A.; Kesari, K.K.; Mushtaq,
G.; Kamal, M.A. In silico analysis of green tea polyphenols as inhibitors of AChE and BChE enzymes in Alzheimer’s disease
treatment. Cns Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 2016, 15, 624–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Yiannopoulou, K.G.; Anastasiou, A.I.; Zachariou, V.; Pelidou, S.-H. Reasons for failed trials of disease-modifying treatments for
Alzheimer disease and their contribution in recent research. Biomedicines 2019, 7, 97. [CrossRef]
172. Oboh, G.; Ogunsuyi, O.B.; Olonisola, O.E. Does caffeine inﬂuence the anticholinesterase and antioxidant properties of donepezil?
Evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies. Metab. Brain Dis. 2017, 32, 629–639. [CrossRef]
173. Nair, A.B.; Jacob, S. A simple practice guide for dose conversion between animals and human. J. Basic Clin. Pharm. 2016, 7, 27–31.
[CrossRef]
174. Reagan-Shaw, S.; Nihal, M.; Ahmad, N. Dose translation from animal to human studies revisited. Faseb J. 2008, 22, 659–661.
[CrossRef]
175. Cunha, R.A. How does adenosine control neuronal dysfunction and neurodegeneration? J. Neurochem. 2016, 139, 1019–1055.
[CrossRef]
176. Dall’lgna, O.P.; Porciúncula, L.O.; Souza, D.O.; Cunha, R.A.; Lara, D.R. Neuroprotection by caffeine and adenosine A2A receptor
blockade of β-amyloid neurotoxicity. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2003, 138, 1207–1209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Faivre, E.; Coelho, J.E.; Zornbach, K.; Malik, E.; Baqi, Y.; Schneider, M.; Cellai, L.; Carvalho, K.; Sebda, S.; Figeac, M.; et al.
Beneﬁcial effect of a selective adenosine A2A receptor antagonist in the APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2018, 11, 235. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
178. da Silva, S.V.; Haberl, M.G.; Zhang, P.; Bethge, P.; Lemos, C.; Gonçalves, N.; Gorlewicz, A.; Malezieux, M.; Gonçalves, F.Q.;
Grosjean, N.; et al. Early synaptic deﬁcits in the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease involve neuronal adenosine A2A
receptors. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11915. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Silva, A.C.; Lemos, C.; Gonçalves, F.Q.; Pliássova, A.V.; Machado, N.J.; Silva, H.B.; Canas, P.M.; Cunha, R.A.; Lopes, J.P.;
Agostinho, P. Blockade of adenosine A2A receptors recovers early deﬁcits of memory and plasticity in the triple transgenic mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 2018, 117, 72–81. [CrossRef]
180. Cunha, R.A.; Agostinho, P.M. Chronic caffeine consumption prevents memory disturbance in different animal models of memory
decline. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2010, 20, S95–S116. [CrossRef]
181. Nabbi-Schroeter, D.; Elmenhorst, D.; Oskamp, A.; Laskowski, S.; Bauer, A.; Kroll, T. Effects of long-term caffeine consumption
on the adenosine A1 receptor in the rat brain: An in vivo PET study with [18F]CPFPX. Mol. Imaging Biol. 2018, 20, 284–291.
[CrossRef]
182. Janitschke, D.; Nelke, C.; Lauer, A.A.; Regner, L.; Winkler, J.; Thiel, A.; Grimm, H.S.; Hartmann, T.; Grimm, M.O.W. Effect of
caffeine and other methylxanthines on Aβ-homeostasis in SH-SY5Y cells. Biomolecules 2019, 9, 689. [CrossRef]
183. Zhang, L.-F.; Zhou, Z.-W.; Wang, Z.-H.; Du, Y.-H.; He, Z.-X.; Cao, C.; Zhou, S.-F. Coffee and caffeine potentiate the antiamyloido-
genic activity of melatonin via inhibition of Aβ oligomerization and modulation of the Tau-mediated pathway in N2a/APP cells.
Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 2014, 9, 241–272. [CrossRef]
184. Fukuyama, K.; Kakio, S.; Nakazawa, Y.; Kobata, K.; Funakoshi-Tago, M.; Suzuki, T.; Tamura, H. Roasted coffee reduces β-amyloid
production by increasing proteasomal β-secretase degradation in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2018,
62, e1800238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
185. Kakio, S.; Funakoshi-Tago, M.; Kobata, K.; Tamura, H. Coffee induces vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in
human neuroblastama SH-SY5Y cells. Nutr. Neurosci. 2017, 20, 336–342. [CrossRef]
186. Madeira, M.H.; Boia, R.; Ambrósio, A.F.; Santiago, A.R. Having a coffee break: The impact of caffeine consumption on microglia-
mediated inﬂammation in neurodegenerative diseases. Mediat. Inﬂamm. 2017, 2017, 4761081. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
187. Kwon, S.-H.; Lee, H.-K.; Kim, J.-A.; Hong, S.-I.; Kim, H.-C.; Jo, T.-H.; Park, Y.-I.; Lee, C.-K.; Kim, Y.-B.; Lee, S.-Y.; et al.
Neuroprotective effects of chlorogenic acid on scopolamine-induced amnesia via anti-acetylcholinesterase and anti-oxidative
activities in mice. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2010, 649, 210–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Lee, C.W.; Won, T.J.; Kim, H.R.; Lee, D.; Hwang, K.W.; Park, S.-Y. Protective effect of chlorogenic acid against Aβ-induced
neurotoxicity. Biomol. Ther. 2011, 19, 181–186. [CrossRef]
189. Oboh, G.; Agunloye, O.M.; Akinyemi, A.J.; Ademiluyi, A.O.; Adefegha, S.A. Comparative study on the inhibitory effect of caffeic
and chlorogenic acids on key enzymes linked to Alzheimer’s disease and some pro-oxidant induced oxidative stress in rats’
brain-in vitro. Neurochem. Res. 2013, 38, 413–419. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2021, 13, 537
33 of 33
190. Gao, L.; Li, X.; Meng, S.; Ma, T.; Wan, L.; Xu, S. Chlorogenic acid alleviates Aβ25–35-induced autophagy and cognitive impairment
via the mTOR/TFEB signaling pathway. Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 2020, 14, 1705–1716. [CrossRef]
191. Wang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Li, J.; Hua, L.; Han, B.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, X.; Zeng, Z.; Bai, H.; Yin, H.; et al. Effects of caffeic acid on learning
deﬁcits in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Med. 2016, 38, 869–875. [CrossRef]
192. Fisone, G.; Borgkvist, A.; Usiello, A. Caffeine as a psychomotor stimulant: Mechanism of action. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2004, 61,
857–872. [CrossRef]
193. Cornelis, M.C.; Munafo, M.R. Mendelian randomization studies of coffee and caffeine consumption. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1343.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
194. Temple, J.L.; Bernard, C.; Lipshultz, S.E.; Czachor, J.D.; Westphal, J.A.; Mestre, M.A. The safety of ingested caffeine: A comprehen-
sive review. Front. Psychiatry 2017, 8, 80. [CrossRef]
195. van Dam, R.M.; Hu, F.B.; Willett, W.C. Coffee, caffeine, and health. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 383, 369–378. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. O’Callaghan, F.; Muurlink, O.; Reid, N. Effects of caffeine on sleep quality and daytime functioning. Risk Manag. Healthc. Policy
2018, 11, 263–271. [CrossRef]
197. Torres-Ugalde, Y.C.; Romero-Palencia, A.; Román-Gutiérrez, A.D.; Ojeda-Ramírez, D.; Guzmán-Saldaña, R.M.E. Caffeine
consumption in children: Innocuous or deleterious? A systematic review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 2489.
[CrossRef]
198. Anderson, R.M.; Hadjichrysanthou, C.; Evans, S.; Wong, M.M. Why do so many clinical trials of therapies for Alzheimer’s disease
fail? Lancet 2017, 390, 2327–2329. [CrossRef]
199. Palmqvist, S.; Insel, P.S.; Stomrud, E.; Janelidze, S.; Zetterberg, H.; Brix, B.; Eichenlaub, U.; Dage, J.L.; Chai, X.; Blennow, K.; et al.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid and plasma biomarker trajectories with increasing amyloid deposition in Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol.
Med. 2019, 11, e11170. [CrossRef]
200. Iranpour, S.; Saadati, H.M.; Koohi, F.; Sabour, S. Association between caffeine intake and cognitive function in adults; effect
modiﬁcation by sex: Data from National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2013–2014. Clin. Nutr. 2020, 39,
2158–2168. [CrossRef]
201. Ritchie, K.; Carrière, I.; de Mendonça, A.; Portet, F.; Dartigues, J.F.; Rouaud, O.; Barberger-Gateau, P.; Ancelin, M.L. The
neuroprotective effects of caffeine: A prospective population study (the Three City Study). Neurology 2007, 69, 536–545. [CrossRef]
202. Johnson-Kozlow, M.; Kritz-Silverstein, D.; Barrett-Connor, E.; Morton, D. Coffee consumption and cognitive function among
older adults. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2002, 156, 842–850. [CrossRef]
