Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds, 35:248–284, 2015
Published with license by Taylor & Francis
ISSN: 1040-6638 print / 1563-5333 online
DOI: 10.1080/10406638.2014.918550
The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs
in Food – A Review
Zuzana Zelinkova and Thomas Wenzl
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Reference Materials and
Measurements, Standards for Food Bioscience Unit, Geel, Belgium
Occurrence and toxicity of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been exten-
sively studied in countries all over the world. PAHs generally occur in complex mix-
tures which may consist of hundreds of compounds. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) proposed in the 1970 to monitor a set of 16 PAHs which are frequently
found in environmental samples. This article reviews the suitability of the 16 EPA
PAHs for the assessment of potential health threats to humans stemming from the
exposure to PAHs by food ingestion. It presents details on analysis methods, the occur-
rence of PAHs in food, regulatory aspects, and related risk management approaches.
In addition, consideration is given to newer evaluations of the toxicity of PAHs and the
requirements for risk assessment and management stemming from them.
Key Words: 16 EPA PAHs, analysis, food, legislation, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
INTRODUCTION
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) form a large class of diverse organic
compounds, each of them containing two or more aromatic rings. PAH gener-
ally occur in complex mixtures, which may consist of hundreds of compounds.
Humans are exposed to PAHs through different pathways. For non-smokers
the major route of exposure is consumption of food (1,2); for smokers the
contribution from smoking can be signiﬁcant. Food can be contaminated from
environmental sources (natural and mostly anthropogenic), from industrial
C⃝Zuzana Zelinkova and Thomas Wenzl. This is an Open Access article. Non-
commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly attributed, cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any
way, is permitted. The moral rights of the named author(s) have been asserted.
Received 2 January 2014; accepted 3 April 2014.
Address correspondence to Thomas Wenzl, European Commission, Joint Research
Centre, Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, Standards for Food
Bioscience Unit, Retieseweg 111,
2440, Geel, Belgium. E-mail: Thomas.Wenzl@
ec.europa.eu
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at
www.tandfonline.com/gpol.
248

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 249
food processing, and from some domestic cooking practices. PAHs can enter
the food chain by deposition from air, or by deposition and transfer from soil
and water (3,4).
Occurrence and toxicity of PAHs have been evaluated by numerous orga-
nizations, e.g., the United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA)
(5), the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IACR) (6), the Scien-
tiﬁc Committee on Food (SCF) (7), the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on
Food Additives (JECFA) (8), the International Programme on Chemical Safety
(IPCS) (9), and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (10).
The U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) and
EPA were required to prepare a list, in order of priority, of substances
that are most commonly found at facilities on the National Priorities List
(NPL) and which are the most signiﬁcant potential threat to human health
due to their known or suspected toxicity and potential for human expo-
sure. This substances priority list is revised and published on a 2-year ba-
sis, with a yearly informal review and revision. The priority list is not a list
of “most toxic” substances, but rather a prioritization of substances based
on a combination of their frequency of occurrence, toxicity, and potential for
human exposure. Thus, substances with low toxicity but high frequency of
occurrence and exposure could be added to the priority list (11). EPA se-
lected 16 PAHs, which are frequently found in environmental monitoring
samples, namely acenaphthene, acenaphthylene, anthracene, ﬂuoranthene,
ﬂuorene, naphthalene, phenanthrene, pyrene, benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]
ﬂuoranthene, benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[ghi]perylene, benzo[a]pyrene, chry-
sene, dibenz[a,h]anthracene, and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene. These 16 EPA PAHs
were identiﬁed in the 1970s (12).
In the EU, SCF assessed the toxicity of PAHs. For most of the PAHs
their carcinogenic and genotoxic potential constitute the critical factor for
the hazard and risk characterizations. In its assessments of PAHs in food
the SCF took note of the evaluations performed by various international
expert groups and prioritized compounds based on the health risk rather
than on occurrence in food. The SCF recommended the monitoring of 15
PAHs in 2002, including 8 high molecular weight PAHs that are also part of
the U.S. EPA list. SCF concluded that 15 out of 33 assessed PAHs, namely
benz[a]anthracene,
benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[k]
ﬂuoranthene, benzo[ghi]perylene, benzo[a]pyrene, chrysene, cyclopenta[cd]
pyrene,
dibenzo[a,h]anthracene,
dibenzo[a,e]pyrene,
dibenzo[a,h]pyrene,
dibenzo[a,i]pyrene,
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene,
indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene,
and
5-
methylchrysene
show
clear
evidence
of
mutagenicity/genotoxicity
and,
with exception of benzo[ghi]perylene, have also shown clear carcinogenic
effects in various types of bioassays in experimental animals (1). It suggested
to use benzo[a]pyrene as a marker of occurrence of carcinogenic PAHs in
food, based on examinations of PAH proﬁles in food and on evaluation of a

250
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
carcinogenicity study of coal tar mixtures in mice (13). SCF also stressed
the need to continue collecting data on other PAHs in order to be able to
evaluate the contamination of food commodities and any possible changes
in the PAH proﬁle. Of the 15 EU priority PAHs, 12 were identical to those
that were identiﬁed by IARC to be human carcinogens based on sufﬁcient
evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animals in 1973–1987. The IARC
has identiﬁed those PAHs as carcinogenic to humans (group 1), and probable
(group 2A) or possible (group 2B) human carcinogens (Table 1). Other PAHs
not deﬁned as carcinogens may act as synergists (6).
Taking into account newer studies, JECFA re-evaluated PAHs in 2005
and concluded that 13 PAHs are clearly genotoxic and carcinogenic. The com-
pounds are the same as those stated by SCF except benzo[ghi]perylene and cy-
clopenta[cd]pyrene. It was recommended to collect data on occurrence of those
PAHs in the major food groups. In addition, JECFA suggested to include also
benzo[c]ﬂuorene as a further compound into the analysis as data on its occur-
rence in food were still insufﬁcient (2).
Following the suggestion of SCF, the European Commission issued a
recommendation on further investigation of PAH levels in certain foods
(14). An evaluation of the data gathered by the Member States by EFSA
in 2008 showed that certain PAHs such as chrysene were found in some
food samples, which were negative for benzo[a]pyrene. In these cases
benzo[a]pyrene cannot be an indicator of PAH contamination in food. As
the most suitable indicators of occurrence of PAHs in food, eight compounds
(PAH8), i.e., benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[ghi]perylene, benzo[a]pyrene, chrysene, dibenz[a,h]anthracene, and
indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene were selected. However, in comparison with a selec-
tion of four compounds (PAH4), i.e., benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[a]pyrene, chrysene, PAH8 does not provide much added value (2).
CONTAMINATION OF FOOD BY PAHS
Food can be contaminated by PAHs that are present in air, soil, or water, or
during food processing and cooking. PAHs are ubiquitous environmental con-
taminants which are widespread in air bound to particulate matter. In spite of
their hydrophobic properties (especially heavy PAHs), they are found in water
as well. These compounds are produced during combustion and pyrolysis pro-
cesses of anthropogenic and natural origin. A high amount of PAHs are emit-
ted from processing coal, during incomplete combustion of organic matter (e.g.,
wood and fossil fuels), from motor vehicle exhaust and cigarettes. Forest ﬁres,
volcanoes and hydrothermal processes are natural emission sources of PAHs
(4). The contamination of vegetation in the neighborhood of industrial areas or
along highways is higher than in rural areas. The levels of PAHs found in un-
processed foods in rural areas reﬂect the background contamination that could

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 251
Table 1: Molecular structure of PAHs assessed by the authorities
Molecular
US EPA
EU priority
IARC
Compound
Structure
weight
PAHs
PAHs
groupa
Acenaphthene
154
x
—
3
Acenaphthylene
152
x
—
Not assessed
Anthracene
178
x
—
3
Fluoranthene
202
x
—
3
Fluorene
166
x
—
3
Naphthalene
128
x
—
2B
Phenanthrene
178
x
—
3
Pyrene
202
x
—
3
Benz[a]anthracene
228
x
x
2B
Benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene
252
x
x
2B
Benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene
252
—
x
2B
Benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene
252
x
x
2B
Benzo[ghi]perylene
276
x
x
3
Benzo[a]pyrene
252
x
x
1
Chrysene
228
x
x
2B
Cyclopenta[cd]pyrene
226
—
x
3
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
278
x
x
2A
Dibenzo[a,e]pyrene
302
—
x
3
Dibenzo[a,h]pyrene
302
—
x
2B
(Continued on next page)

252
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Table 1: Molecular structure of PAHs assessed by the authorities (Continued)
Molecular
US EPA
EU priority
IARC
Compound
Structure
weight
PAHs
PAHs
groupa
Dibenzo[a,i]pyrene
302
—
x
2B
Dibenzo[a,l]pyrene
302
—
x
2A
Indeno[1,2,3—cd]pyrene
276
x
x
2B
5—Methylchrysene
242
—
x
2B
Benzo[c]ﬂuorene
216
—
x
3
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) classiﬁcation: group 1 = carcinogenic to
humans, group 2A = probably carcinogenic to human, group 2B = possibly carcinogenic to
humans, group 3 = not classiﬁable as to carcinogenicity to humans
originate from long distance airborne transportation of contaminated parti-
cles (15). The contamination of food with environmental PAHs depends on a
number of physical and chemical properties of PAHs such as their solubility in
water and fats/oils, volatility, chemical reactivity, and biotic and abiotic degrad-
ability (16,17). The waxy surface of vegetables and fruits can concentrate low
molecular mass PAHs, mainly through surface adsorption. The concentration
of PAHs are generally greater on the plant surface (outer leaves, peel) than in
internal tissue (18). Seafood and ﬁsh can be exposed to PAHs present in wa-
ter and sediments due to atmospheric pollution or oil spills. The PAH content
greatly depends on the ability of the aquatic organisms to metabolize them.
Bivalve mollusks such as mussels and oysters can accumulate high molecular
mass PAHs because they ﬁlter large volumes of water and they are not capable
to metabolize efﬁciently all PAHs (3,19).
Processing of food (drying, smoking) and cooking of food at high temper-
atures (grilling, frying, roasting, baking) are commonly considered to be the
major sources of food contamination by PAHs (20–22). Seeds and raw products
for oil production may be contaminated with PAHs through artiﬁcial drying
and heating during processing, if precautionary measures are not taken (e.g.,
indirect drying and good temperature control). Drying of seeds and kernels is
thought to be one of the prominent sources for the contamination of edible oils
with PAHs (23). Certain preservation techniques such as industrial smoking
of meat and dairy products under inappropriate conditions could also lead to
food contamination with PAHs (24). The PAH contamination of smoked foods

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 253
can be signiﬁcantly reduced by replacing direct smoking with indirect smok-
ing obtained by an external smoke generator. As PAHs are bound to particles,
a ﬁlter may be used to remove particulate material from the smoke. This will
reduce contamination with PAHs (25). Roasting and drying of coffee beans,
cocoa beans and tea leaves may increase the PAH content (26,27). Currently,
signiﬁcant levels of PAHs were reported in certain food supplements, mainly
those which undergo an inappropriate drying process (28). Furthermore, liq-
uid smoke ﬂavoring products are used by food industry to improve organoleptic
characteristics. They are added to various foods either to replace the smoking
process or to impart smoke ﬂavor to foods which are not traditionally smoked.
Smoke ﬂavoring products are produced from smoke condensates, which might
be a source of PAHs as well; however, the levels are in general lower than in
products made with freshly generated smoke (29,30).
PAHs are also formed as a result of some domestic food preparation meth-
ods. When food, particularly meat and ﬁsh, are cooked over an open ﬂame,
PAHs are formed. If the grilled food is in direct contact with the ﬂame, pyroly-
sis of the drippings from meat or ﬁsh generates PAHs that can be deposited on
its surface. Even if not in direct contact, fat dripping onto the ﬂame or hot coals
generates these compounds that are carried back onto the surface of the food
(31). PAH formation during charcoal grilling was shown to be dependent upon
the fat content of the meat, duration of cooking and the temperature used.
Smoked and grilled food may contribute signiﬁcantly to the intake of PAHs if
such foods are a large part of the usual diet. Simple practices such as selecting
preferentially lean meat and ﬁsh and avoiding contact of foods with ﬂames for
barbecuing, using less fat for grilling, and cooking at lower temperature for
longer time, results in a signiﬁcant reduction of food contamination by PAHs
(32).
Despite the low levels found, cereals and cereal products were identiﬁed
as a major contributor to the intake of PAHs, owing to their high consump-
tion. Another major contributor is vegetable fats and oils owing to the higher
concentration of PAHs in this food group. Even though their concentration of
PAHs can be high, smoked ﬁsh and meats and barbecued foods do not con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to exposure, as they are usually a small component of the
diet. However, they do make larger contributions leading to higher PAH in-
takes when these foods make up a large part of the diet (2,33).
REGULATORY LIMITS IN FOOD
Although the 16 EPA PAHs are highly relevant for environmental monitoring
programs, they did not enter food legislation. This is demonstrated in the fol-
lowing based on examples for legislation on PAHs in food for countries from all

254
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
over the world. However, it will be stressed that the provided details are not
exhaustive.
U.S. Legislation
The U.S. federal government set regulatory standards and guidelines to
protect people from the possible health effects caused by eating, drinking, or
breathing PAHs. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, EPA sets legal maximum
limits on the level of benzo[a]pyrene in drinking water (0.2 μg/L). Another limit
was set by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) based on the
evaluation of occupational exposure to coal products. The OSHA has estab-
lished a legally enforceable exposure limit of 0.2 mg/m3 air averaged over an
8-h period of work place exposure. An exposure limit was set also for mineral
oil mist by OSHA and NIOSH at a level of 5 mg/m3 averaged over an 8-h expo-
sure period and 5 mg/m3 for a 10-h work day, respectively (34,35). As far as we
know, no maximum limits for PAH contents of foodstuffs have been introduced
into U.S. legislation.
EU Legislation
The European Commission set maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene for the
ﬁrst time in 2005 by Regulation (EC) No 208/2005 amending Regulation (EC)
No 466/2001 (36). Later, the maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene were laid
down in Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006 setting maximum levels for certain
contaminants in foodstuffs (37). A maximum level for the sum of the four
PAHs (benzo[a]pyrene, benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, and chry-
sene) was included by Regulation (EU) No 835/2011 amending Regulation (EC)
No 1881/2006 (38). New maximum levels for the sum of PAH4 were introduced,
whilst maintaining separate maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene (Table 2).
This approach aims at ensuring that PAH levels in food are kept at levels that
do not cause health concerns and that foods in which benzo[a]pyrene is not
detectable, but where other PAH are present are prevented from entering the
market. The separate maximum level for benzo[a]pyrene was maintained to
ensure comparability of previous and future data. However some of the maxi-
mum levels will be lowered as from 2014/2015.
Maximum levels are especially set for foodstuffs containing fats and oils
and foods where smoking and drying processes or environmental pollution
might cause high levels of contamination. The lowest maximum levels are set
for food for infants and young children. In some cases the new PAH occur-
rence data show that background levels of PAHs are lower than previously
thought in some food commodities (2,38,39). Benzo[a]pyrene maximum levels
have therefore been adapted to reﬂect lower background levels in fresh and

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 255
Table 2: Maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene and the sum of benzo[a]pyrene,
benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, and chrysene as laid down in
Regulation (EU) No 835/2011
Maximum levels [μg/kg]
Foodstuffs
Benzo[a]pyrene
Sum of
benzo[a]pyrene,
benz[a]anthracene,
benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene
and chrysene
6.1.1
Oils and fats (excluding
cocoa butter and
coconut oil) intended
for direct human
consumption or use as
an ingredient in food
2.0
10.0
6.1.2
Cocoa beans and
derived products
5.0 μg/kg fat
35.0 μg/kg fat until
31.3.2015
30.0 μg/kg fat from
1.4.2015
6.1.3
Coconut oil intended for
direct human
consumption or use as
an ingredient in food
2.0
20.0
6.1.4
Smoked meat and
smoked meat products
5.0 until 31.8.2014
2.0 as from 1.9.2014
30.0 until 31.8.2014
12.0 as from 1.9.2014
6.1.5
Muscle meat of smoked
ﬁsh and smoked ﬁshery
products, excluding
ﬁshery products listed in
points 6.1.6 and 6.1.7.
The maximum level for
smoked crustaceans
applies to muscle meat
from appendages and
abdomen. In case of
smoked crabs and
crab-like crustaceans it
applies to muscle meat
from appendages.
5.0 until 31.8.2014
2.0 as from 1.9.2014
30.0 until 31.8.2014
12.0 as from 1.9.2014
6.1.6
Smoked sprats and
canned smoked sprats;
bivalve molluscs (fresh,
chilled or frozen); heat
treated meat and heat
treated meat products
sold to the ﬁnal
consumer
5.0
30.0
6.1.7
Bivalve molluscs
(smoked)
6.0
35.0
6.1.8
Processed cereal-based
foods and baby foods
for infants and young
children
1.0
1.0
6.1.9
Infant formulae and
follow-on formulae,
including infant milk
and follow-on milk
1.0
1.0
(Continued on next page)

256
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Table 2: Maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene and the sum of benzo[a]pyrene,
benz[a]anthracene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, and chrysene as laid down in
Regulation (EU) No 835/2011(Continued)
Maximum levels [μg/kg]
Foodstuffs
Benzo[a]pyrene
Sum of
benzo[a]pyrene,
benz[a]anthracene,
benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene
and chrysene
6.1.10
Dietary foods for special
medical purposes
intended speciﬁcally
for infants
1.0
1.0
smoked bivalve mollusks. Data for smoked ﬁsh and smoked meat have also
shown that lower maximum levels are achievable. Smoked sprats and canned
smoked sprats have been found to contain higher levels of PAH than other
smoked ﬁsh. Speciﬁc maximum levels should be established for these com-
modities. High levels of PAHs have been found in some types of heat treated
meat and meat products sold to the ﬁnal consumer. Maximum levels for PAHs
were set in meat and meat products that have undergone a heat treatment
process known to potentially result in formation of PAHs, i.e., grilling and bar-
becuing. Previously, a maximum level for benzo[a]pyrene in muscle meat of
ﬁsh other than smoked ﬁsh was established as an indicator for potential envi-
ronmental pollution. It has been shown that PAHs are quickly metabolized in
fresh ﬁsh and do not accumulate in ﬁsh muscle (40,41). Therefore, maintaining
a maximum level for PAHs in fresh ﬁsh is no longer appropriate. Cocoa but-
ter was also included into the regulation as it contains higher levels of PAHs
than other oils and fats. It was temporarily derogated in 2005 (until 2007) and
from 2011 onwards levels are regulated. Cocoa butter is present in chocolate
and other cocoa products often consumed by children. Current occurrence data
on PAHs in cereals and vegetables are limited and indicate rather low levels
of PAHs, which do not justify the immediate setting of maximum levels. Nev-
ertheless, EFSA identiﬁed cereals and vegetables as being important contrib-
utors to human exposure due to their high consumption (2). Therefore, PAH
levels in these two product groups should be further monitored. High levels
of PAHs have been found in some food supplements. However, the levels are
variable and depend on the speciﬁc type of food supplements. Further data on
food supplement are still needed and should be collected.
Regulation (EC) No 2065/2003 on smoke ﬂavorings used or intended for use
in or on foods requires that the precursors to commercial smoke ﬂavorings have
to be approved for the marketing of the products in the EU. The application for

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 257
registration has to be accompanied by a dossier which must contain data on
the chemical composition of the respective products. This includes a group of
15 EU PAHs. For benzo[a]pyrene and benz[a]anthracene, maximum permitted
concentrations of 10 and 20 μg/kg have been set (42).
Council Directive 98/83/EC on the quality of water intended for hu-
man consumption established a maximum limit for benzo[a]pyrene of
0.010 μg/L and for the sum of benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[ghi]perylene, and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene of 0.10 μg/L (43).
Regulation (EC) No 333/2007 lays down provisions for the methods of sam-
pling and analytical performance criteria only for benzo[a]pyrene (44). Upon
amending Regulation (EC) 1881/2006 by Regulation (EU) 835/2011, it was
necessary to specify method performance criteria also for the other three com-
pounds. For this reason Regulation (EU) No 836/2011 amending Regulation
(EC) No 333/2007 laying down the methods of sampling and analysis for the
ofﬁcial control was introduced (45). It contains strict requirements for meth-
ods of analysis in order to ensure that control laboratories use procedures with
comparable levels of performance. The requirements for sampling methods dif-
fer especially depending on the type and weight of a lot, in order to obtain
samples that are representative for the respective lot. As a speciﬁc and de-
tailed requirement it is laid down that the analyst shall ensure that samples
do not become contaminated during sample preparation. Sampling equipment
packaging material coming into contact with the sample shall be made of inert
materials such as aluminium, glass, or polished stainless steel. Plastics such
as polypropylene or polytetraﬂuoroethylene shall be avoided because PAHs can
adsorb onto these materials (44). Containers shall be rinsed with high purity
acetone or n-hexane to minimize the risk of contamination. Losses of PAHs
may also occur if the sample is exposed to light and high temperatures during
sample collection and storage (2,45).
Regarding analytical methods, EU legislation on contaminants in food fol-
lows a “criteria approach”. This means that the legislator does not prescribe
speciﬁc analysis procedures, but allows laboratories to use different methods
of analysis, provided it can be demonstrated in an objective manner that they
fulﬁl the analytical requirements laid down in the respective legislation. Pref-
erence is given to fully validated methods (i.e., methods validated by collabo-
rative trial for the respective matrix). However, in their absence other suitable
validated methods (e.g. in-house validated methods for the respective matrix)
may be applied. Where possible, the validation of in-house validated methods
shall include a certiﬁed reference material (2). Different parameters are set
for the performance criteria such as applicability, speciﬁcity, repeatability, re-
producibility, limits of detection (LOD) and quantiﬁcation (LOQ), and recovery.
LOD and LOQ are deﬁned as less than 0.30 μg/kg and less than 0.90 μg/kg for
each of the four substances, respectively (45). Recovery shall be in the range
between 50% and 120% (45). Speciﬁcity is deﬁned as “free from matrix or

258
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
spectral interferences, veriﬁcation of positive detection”. HORRATr and
HORRATR values of less than 2 are speciﬁed for the precision of the analy-
sis methods (45).
If only in-house validated methods are available a “ﬁtness-for-purpose”
approach may be used to assess their suitability for ofﬁcial control. Suitable
methods must produce results with a combined standard measurement uncer-
tainty less than the maximum tolerated standard measurement uncertainty
calculated using the formula:
Uf =

(LOD/2)2 + (aC)2
where Uf it the maximum tolerated standard measurement uncertainty, LOD
is the limit of detection, C is the concentration of interest, and α is a nu-
meric factor to be used depending on the value of C (e.g., for the concentration
≤50 μg/kg, α is set to 0.2) (45).
EU legislation on contaminants such as PAHs, in food is applicable in the
European Economic Area, which includes beyond the 28 EU Member States
also Iceland, Lichtenstein, and Norway.
Legislation in Other Countries
Health Canada’s Food Directorate is responsible for the assessment of risks
to human health from the exposure to hazardous substances in food. Maximum
levels are enforced by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) and are
established in the Canadian Food and Drug Regulations. Levels of chemicals
in food are monitored through continued surveillance activities by both Health
Canada and CFIA. Regarding PAHs in food, a maximum level was set solely for
the benzo[a]pyrene content of olive-pomace oil (3 μg/kg). However, the general
provision in the Canadian legislation that no person shall sell an article of food
that has in or on it any poisonous or harmful substances, regardless of whether
or not there exists a maximum level is also applicable to PAHs (46). Besides
olive pomace oil, a maximum acceptable concentration for benzo[a]pyrene is
also established for drinking water (0.01 μg/L) (47).
China National Standard, or GB (Guobiao) Standard, comprises a set of
mandatory and recommended standards issued by the Standardisation Ad-
ministration of China. On November 13, 2012, the Ministry of Health issued
the food safety national standard GB 2762-2012 (Maximum Levels of contami-
nants in Foods) to replace the preceding 2005 edition (GB 2762-2005). GB2762-
2012 came into force as of June 1, 2013. This GB Standard sets maximum
levels of certain contaminants in foods including benzo[a]pyrene. Maximum
limits for benzo[a]pyrene are set for four food categories (Table 3) (48).
In Brazil, regulations establish maximum levels for benzo[a]pyrene in
smoke ﬂavorings (30 μg/kg, set by Resoluc¸ ˜ao RDC n. 281/2003 (49)), olive oil

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 259
Table 3: Indicators of maximum levels of benzo[a]pyrene in foods regulated in
China
Food type/ Name
Maximum levels (μg/kg)
Paddy, wheat
5
Smoked or baked meats
5
Smoked or baked aquatic products
5
Fats and oils, and fat emulsions
10
(2.0 μg/kg, set by Resoluc¸ ˜ao RDC n. 2/2007 (50)), and drinking water (0.7 μg/L
set by Portaria MS n. 518/2004 (51)).
PAH ANALYSIS IN FOOD
Quality assurance tools supporting PAH analysis in food
The determination of trace analytes in complex matrices is a serious chal-
lenge, and needs a comprehensive set of quality assurance tools. The reliability
of analysis results can be supported by external quality control tools such as
proﬁciency tests (PTs) and certiﬁed reference materials (CRMs), as well as the
application of well characterized and standardized analysis methods. The vali-
dation of analytical methods is thus of extreme importance to demonstrate that
they are ﬁt for purpose. Fundamental guidance on the management of, among
others, analytical chemistry laboratories and the demonstration of their com-
petence is provided by EN ISO/IEC 17025:2005 (52). Currently, great emphasis
is placed on food control laboratories to follow ISO 17025 practices and to ob-
tain accreditation according to this standard for their analytical methods in
order to ascertain a high level of reliability of the generated data (53,54).
Valuable information on the performance of a laboratory in the execution
of certain tests comes from the feedback provided by PT programs. Regularly
participating in PTs is an essential requirement for laboratory accreditation.
Several national and supranational PT providers such as the Food Analysis
Performance Assessment Scheme (FAPAS R⃝) or the Deutsche Gesellschaft f¨ur
Fettforschung (DGF) have offered PT rounds on the determination of PAHs in
food for a number of years. Comprehensive information on offered proﬁciency
tests can be found in the EPTIS database (55).
In the EU, the European Union reference laboratories (EU-RLs) in the area
of food and feed safety are required to organize annually in their area of compe-
tence proﬁciency tests for the national reference laboratories of the EU Mem-
ber States. The EU-RL for PAHs (EU-RL PAH) organizes one to two PT rounds

260
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
per year on. The advantage of the EU-RL PT scheme is that continuous feed-
back and training over time has led to outstanding measurement capabilities
of the participants (56,57).
CRMs are useful quality control tools for laboratories and are used for
method validation (trueness determination) and method performance veriﬁ-
cation to ensure that method performance criteria are met. CRMs provide a
certiﬁed value, which represents the best possible estimate for the true value,
and its uncertainty. In that respect, CRMs that represent real food matri-
ces are especially important. However, one has to acknowledge that it is im-
possible to provide suitable CRMs for each possible analyte/matrix combina-
tion. The availability of CRMs for PAHs in food matrices is limited (Table 4)
and thus PT test materials might be a suitable substitute for quality control
purposes (58).
Standards Methods for Food Samples
The ﬁrst ofﬁcial method for the analysis of benzo[a]pyrene was devel-
oped for food products such as smoked foods, meat, cheese, total diet compos-
ites and beverages. Collaborative studies of this method covering either only
benzo[a]pyrene or PAHs in general in food products were conducted under the
auspices of the Association of Ofﬁcial Analytical Chemists (AOAC) and Inter-
national Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). The procedure con-
sisted of an initial saponiﬁcation of the sample in ethanolic potassium hydrox-
ide solution, followed by a partition step between iso-octane, water and alcohol
and column chromatography on Florisil. Further puriﬁcation is done by liquid-
liquid extraction with dimethylsulphoxide and thin-layer chromatography on
cellulose plates. For determination of individual PAHs, ultraviolet spectropho-
tometry, conﬁrmed by the spectrophotoﬂuorometry, was used. The method was
adopted as an AOAC ofﬁcial ﬁrst action method in 1972 and accepted as a
recommended method by IUPAC in 1975. Statistical evaluation of the data
obtained by interlaboratory tests, in which ham samples were fortiﬁed with
benzo[a]pyrene, benzo[e]pyrene, benzo[a]anthracene, and benzo[ghi]perylene
at a level of 10 μg/kg and analyzed by the above mentioned method showed
a repeatability relative standard deviation (RSDr) between 7.4% and 12.7%.
On this basis, the method has been adopted as the ofﬁcial method of AOAC
(59).
A method for the determination of benzo[a]pyrene in animal and vegetable
fats and oils was standardized by the International Organization for Standard-
ization (ISO 15302) in 1998. This method is based on reverse phase HPLC-
ﬂuorescence detection (FLD) after clean-up on alumina. The range was from
0.1 μg/kg to 10 μg/kg. Later, the method was revised and the applicable range
was extended to 50 μg/kg (60).

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 261
Table 4: Currently commercially available certiﬁed reference materials (CRMs) for
PAHs in food matrices
Producer
CRM
Matrices
Notes
NISTa
SRM 1974c
organics in
mussels tissue
22 PAHs with certiﬁed values (10
EPA), 18 PAHs with reference
values (6 EPA), including
alkylated PAHs
NISTa
SRM 2974a
organics in
freeze-dried
mussels tissue
21 PAHs with certiﬁed values (8
EPA), 18 PAHs with reference
values (5 EPA), including
alkylated PAHs
EC-JRC-IRMMb BCR 458
coconut oil (PAH
doped)
6 PAHs (pyrene, chrysene,
benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[a]pyrene,
benzo[ghi]perylene,
indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene,
currently out of stock
EC-JRC-IRMMb BCR 459
coconut oil (PAH
blank)
6 PAHs (pyrene, chrysene,
benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[a]pyrene,
benzo[ghi]perylene,
indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene
IAEAc
IAEA-140/OC seaweed
14 PAHs with recommended
values (11 EPA), 7 PAHs with
information values (4 EPA),
broad conﬁdence intervals,
currently out of stock
IAEAc
IAEA-406
ﬁsh homogenate
1 PAH with recommended value
(pyrene), 14 PAHs with
information values (12 EPA)
IAEAc
IAEA-432
mussel
homogenate
13 PAHs with recommended value
(10 EPA), 4 PAHs with information
values (1 EPA), elevated
standard deviations
IAEAc
IAEA-435
tuna
homogenate
5 PAHs with recommended value
(4 EPA), 17 PAHs with information
values (11 EPA), elevated
standard deviations
aNational Institute of Standards and Technology (http://www.nist.gov)
bEuropean Commission – Joint Research Centre – Institute for Reference Materials and Mea-
surements (https://irmm.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference materials catalogue/Pages/index.aspx)
cInternational Atomic Energy Agency (http://www.iaea.org)
Another international standard, ISO 15753 (61), focuses on the determina-
tion of a whole set of 16 EPA PAHs in animal and vegetable fats and oils, al-
though it does not provide quantitative results for the very volatile compounds
such as naphthalene, acenaphthene, and ﬂuorene. This international standard
describes two methods, a general method and a method speciﬁc for coconut oil
and vegetable oils with short chain fatty acids. PAHs are extracted, puriﬁed
by solid phase extraction (SPE) and then are determined by reversed phase
HPLC-FLD. Palm oil and olive pomace olive oil cannot be analyzed by this

262
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
method due to matrix interferences. The reported quantiﬁcation limits for al-
most all analyzed compounds were 0.2 μg/kg (61).
The determination of PAHs in edible fats and oils of in total 17 PAHs (in-
cluding 14 EPA PAHs) by ISO 22959 (62) is achieved by on-line coupling of
donor acceptor complex chromatography to reversed phase HPLC-FLD. The
oil samples are loaded onto a column with a stationary phase which acts as
an electron acceptor. The column retains the PAHs (electron donors) by π-π in-
teractions. After elution of oil the PAHs are on-line transferred to the analyt-
ical reversed phase column. The limits of quantiﬁcation for individual PAHs
are 0.1 μg/kg and the validated concentration ranges for each analyte from
0.1 μg/kg to 3.5 μg/kg (62).
A method based on gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) was published in 2004 and currently is under further development
(PD ISO/TR 24054). Also, this method focused on animal and vegetable fats
and oils and is able to determine up to 27 PAHs (among them also the 16 EPA
PAHs). Test portions are fortiﬁed with appropriate 13C internal standards and
subjected to saponiﬁcation followed by liquid-liquid extraction. After the pu-
riﬁcation step on a silica gel column instrumental analysis is undertaken by
GC-MS (63).
After the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 AOAC International invited
method developers to submit methods for measurement of PAHs in seafood
for consideration and possible evaluation through the AOAC Ofﬁcial Methods
program. The selected method was based on the extraction with ethyl acetate,
salting-out with NaCl and MgSO4 followed by silica SPE clean-up and instru-
mental analysis by GC/MS (64). In total, 32 PAHs were determined including
16 EPA PAHs and several of their methylated homologues with LOQ ranging
from 0.05–0.25 μg/kg, recoveries between 73–97%, and repeatability (RSD) be-
tween 2–13%. The method was subjected to collaborative study and later ac-
cepted as the ofﬁcial method (65).
A
European
Standard
(EN)
for
the
determination
of
four
PAHs
(benz[a]anthracene,
benzo[a]pyrene,
benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene,
and
chrysene)
based on GC/MS is under development. PAHs are extracted from food by pres-
surized liquid extraction (PLE) and puriﬁed by size exclusion chromatography
(SEC) followed by the solid-phase extraction (SPE) on silica. The release of the
EN by the European Committee for Standardization (CEN) is expected by end
of 2014.
Analysis Methods for the Determination of the 16 EPA
PAHs in Food
Depending on the target analytes, the methods published in the scientiﬁc
literature for the determination of PAH in food can be divided into two groups.
The ﬁrst group focuses on the 16 PAHs speciﬁed by EPA and the second on

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 263
the 15+1 EU priority PAHs speciﬁed by SCF/JECFA. As this special edition of
the PAC journal targets the 16 EPA PAHs, methods dealing solely with the de-
termination of the 15+1 EU priority PAHs were not considered in this review
and only those for the EPA PAH analysis were reviewed. Nevertheless, sample
preparation for the determination of both of these PAH groups is usually based
on the same principles.
When analyzing complex samples such as foodstuffs, many other matrix
components are unavoidably co-extracted together with the target analytes.
Oils, waxes, essential oils, and natural pigments such as carotenoids and
chlorophylls are the most typical matrix components occurring in extracts ob-
tained from samples of plant origin. In animal tissues, lipids represent the
major class of co-extracts. Effective separation of these substances, which can
adversely affect identiﬁcation and/or quantiﬁcation of PAHs, is a prerequisite
for obtaining reliable results. However, not only good separation of target an-
alytes from co-extracts, but also the overall throughput of the clean-up step
(which is largely dependent on the possibility of its automatization) is an im-
portant criterion to consider when choosing an analysis procedure (66). The
required sample clean-up of food samples depends on the selectivity of the ap-
plied extraction technique and on the chromatographic method to be applied.
This becomes more difﬁcult if one aim is to eliminate or minimize the use
of hazardous substances such as organic solvents in the analytical extraction
step. New trends focus on utilizing more benign extraction solvents as well as
micro-extraction procedures.
The methods used for extraction of PAHs from food greatly depend on the
nature of the food matrix. The common approach for the isolation of PAHs
from fatty foods, mainly edible oil samples, involves saponiﬁcation of lipids by
methanolic or ethanolic KOH or NaOH solution followed by the isolation of
the PAHs containing unsaponiﬁable fraction by liquid-liquid extraction (LLE)
with cyclohexane (21,67) or n-hexane (68). Several other different procedures
are described for PAHs extraction, namely solid-liquid extraction (SLE) with
toluene (69), n-hexane (70), or a mixture of cyclohexane and ethyl acetate (71),
LLE with n-hexane (72), mixture of n-hexane and acetone (73) or, more effec-
tively, salting-out-assisted LLE in which a relatively high salt concentration
and high ionic strength may improve analyte extraction with cyclohexane (74)
or n-hexane (75). Also, a traditional Soxhlet extraction was applied for PAH
analysis using dichloromethane (76) or its mixture with n-hexane (77). Nowa-
days, automated and more efﬁcient extraction techniques such as PLE (78–83)
and microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) (70,84,85) are more widely used.
The extractants used in PLE and MAE are the same as for classical extrac-
tion techniques (Soxhlet extraction), therefore PLE and MAE are essentially
non-selective extraction methods. An effective clean-up procedure for remov-
ing co-extracted interfering substances is thus crucial for the determination of
PAHs that are present at trace levels in the crude extracts.

264
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Gel-permeation chromatography (GPC), providing separation according to
differences in the molecular size (or more exactly effective molecular volume),
together with adsorption chromatography and solid phase extraction (SPE)
constitutes the dominating puriﬁcation technique for the processing of primary
food extracts (66). The GPC procedure may employ several types of gels for
the puriﬁcation of extracts and the elution of sample components is usually
carried out by different elution solvents, e.g., dichloromethane, n-hexane, cy-
clohexane, ethyl acetate, chloroform, and their mixtures (73,75–77,79). As re-
gards adsorption chromatography and SPE, the use of silica (72,74,81,85,86),
alumina (70,71,78), Florisil (68,80), aminopropyl (21), C18 (21), or styrene-
divinylbenzene co-polymeres (83,87) are reported in the literature. The com-
bination of GPC and further SPE clean-up resulted in relatively clean extracts
from food matrices, avoiding problems with chromatographic interferences for
most compounds (66,86).
However, multi-stage sample preparation usually results in high consump-
tion of hazardous organic solvents, high costs, long analysis time, and might
increase the risk of analyte losses, low precision of analysis and bias. A one-
step PLE method can be achieved by adding a stationary phase (e.g., silica or
alumina) directly to the PLE extraction cell. This method has previously been
used in the analysis of polychlorinated biphenyls in ﬁsh samples. The use of
activated silica for extraction of PAHs from lard yielded both fat-free extracts
and high recoveries for all PAHs (82). Sulphuric acid-impregnated silica gave
fat-free extracts, but led to low recoveries of acenaphthylene, acenaphthene,
and anthracene. Neutral, basic, and acidic alumina also provided effective fat
retention, but the recoveries of high-molecular weight PAHs were generally
low in case of sausages. PLE efﬁciency of PAHs increases with temperature,
while fat retention capacity is reduced. Hence, the extraction temperature has
to be chosen with care to obtain both high recoveries of PAHs and fat-free ex-
tracts (82). This aspect was also described for ﬁsh and ﬁsh oil samples that
were extracted and simultaneously cleaned-up in the presence of aluminium
oxide and silica gel in the PLE step; the process ensured a sufﬁciently puriﬁed
sample (79).
Removal of lipids from PLE extracts was tested by treatment with sul-
phuric acid. The extracts of fortiﬁed ﬁsh tissues obtained by PLE were
treated with sulphuric acid (18 M) to remove lipids, but unfortunately sev-
eral PAHs were affected as well. Notably, acenaphthylene, anthracene, and
benzo[a]pyrene were completely eliminated, whereas the peak intensities of
other PAHs were reduced. This may be attributed to the strong oxidizing na-
ture of 18 M H2SO4, resulting in the decomposition of some PAHs. When the
concentration of sulphuric acid was reduced to 9 M during the clean-up pro-
cess, no signiﬁcant loss of PAHs was observed (80).
Headspace solid-phase microextraction (HS-SPME) is an extraction tech-
nique that fulﬁls well the requirements for a rapid and automated extraction

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 265
of complex liquid matrices. Fully automated workﬂows can be developed, be-
ing thus a reliable alternative to conventional solvent-based extraction tech-
niques. The main parameters of the HS-SPME technique that need to be care-
fully studied are the ﬁber composition, sample volume or weight, temperature
and incubation, and desorption time of the sample. In addition, some modiﬁers
may be added to the samples in order to achieve better sensitivity. The addi-
tion of salt increases the ionic strength of the sample so that the solubility of
the analytes decreases, facilitating their transfer to the gas phase. Applied to
the analysis of soft drinks and also vegetable samples, this showed sufﬁcient
recoveries and repeatability with low detection limits (88,89).
The QuEChERS (quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, safe) method was de-
veloped for the determination of pesticides in vegetable and fruit samples. It is
characterized by short extraction and puriﬁcation times, as well as low solvent
consumption. Recently, several modiﬁcations of the QuEChERS method were
proposed for the analysis of PAHs in seafood such as shrimp, scallops, mussel,
and ﬁsh, and in meat. Because of the differences in the matrix effect exerted
by different food commodities, the applicability of QuEChERS methods has to
be evaluated carefully (90–96).
In recent years, magnetic solid-phase extraction (MPSE), a promising tech-
nique for sample preparation, has attracted much interest. It is a new mode of
extraction based on the use of magnetic or magnetizable adsorbents, which can
be readily isolated from sample matrix with an external magnet. Hence, two
of the signiﬁcant advantages of MSPE are simplicity and convenience. Fur-
thermore, in MSPE, the adsorbents can be uniformly dispersed into the sam-
ple solution by vortexing or shaking, which makes the contact area between
the adsorbents and the analytes large enough to ensure a fast mass trans-
fer. It leads to high extraction efﬁciency in a short time, which is desirable
in high throughput sample preparations. Magnetic multiwalled carbon nan-
otubes (mMWCNTs) have been employed as a sorbent for MSPE of PAHs from
edible oils. They are adsorbed onto mMWCNTs through π-π interaction after
vigorous vortexing. The PAHs are then desorbed with toluene by ultrasonic
agitation and directly analyzed (67).
The two main instrumental analysis techniques for determination of PAHs
in food are HPLC-FLD and GC-MS. Earlier methods based on HPLC with ul-
traviolet (UV) or photo diode array detection (PDA) or GC with ﬂame ionization
detection (FID) are outdated due to their poor selectivity and sensitivity. Mass
spectrometric methods have become popular because of the high selectivity of
this detector enabling the conﬁrmation of analyte identity based on the mass
spectrum and the possibility to use stable isotope labelled PAHs as internal
standards. Single quadrupole MS is the main detection technique applied but
the use of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and high resolution mass spec-
trometry increased in recent years (97).
HPLC/FLD has been extensively applied for the determination of PAHs in
foodstuffs and beverages, since it is rather cheap and simple, in comparison

266
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
with other detection systems (97). Low concentration of anthracene and pery-
lene are best measured by use of HPLC/FLD because of their selective and
sensitive ﬂuorescence-detection characteristics (98). The reported limits of de-
tection are frequently at the sub-ppb level (0.01–1 μg/kg). However, low LODs
might not be achieved for all PAHs due to selectivity issues as well as due to
the inherent ﬂuorescence properties. GC/MS provides more accurate results for
the determination of benzo[ghi]perylene because of its low ﬂuorescence (98).
Moreover, acenaphthylene is not detected by FLD because it does not emit any
ﬂuorescence. Another disadvantage is the impossibility of internal standard-
ization with isotopically labeled compounds as FLD cannot distinguish them
from the native PAHs; benzo[b]chrysene can be used alternatively as an inter-
nal standard (99,100). A large improvement of the analysis of PAHs in complex
matrices can be achieved by using HPLC/MS, although sufﬁcient sensitivity
was achieved only in the atmospheric pressure photoionization (APPI) mode
(101–103). For HPLC separation specially designed reversed-phase columns
are commercially available (see the paper by S.A. Wise, L.C: Sander and M.M.
Schantz in this issue).
The most critical aspect when developing a GC method is the selection
of an appropriate stationary phase for the separation of target PAHs (104).
Methyl- and phenyl-substituted polysiloxanes are the most widely used sta-
tionary phases for PAH separation, typically 5% phenyl-95% methylpolysilox-
ane substitution (HP-5, HP-5ms). Columns prepared with polysiloxane sta-
tionary phases give relatively low background from column bleed, even at
high temperatures (> 300◦C) (105). Considering the 16 EPA PAHs, there
are several groups which might co-elute, also with others PAHs presented in
the sample. Five groups of PAHs represent this type of resolution problems:
(i) chrysene and triphenylene; (ii) cyclopenta[cd]pyrene, benz[a]anthracene
and chrysene; (iii) benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene and benzo[k]
ﬂuoranthene; (iv) dibenz[a,c]anthracene and dibenz[a,h]anthracene; and (v)
dibenzo[a,h]anthracene and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene (100, 104). In case of co-
elution, a sum of grouped PAHs is usually reported, which could affect the
correct implementation of food legislation. A general problem in the GC anal-
ysis of PAHs is the high discrimination observed for high molecular-weight
compounds in comparison to other compounds with low and medium molec-
ular weight. This discrimination is usually caused by different behavior of
the analytes in the injection port, which causes unequal transfer of the an-
alytes into the column. Discrimination may also be due to the strong interac-
tion with the stationary phase, resulting in broad peaks. In order to reduce
discrimination in the injection port, injection techniques such as programmed
temperature vaporization (PTV) and on-column injection can be applied (106).
The combination of PTV and large volume injection has been successfully
applied for the analysis of both light and heavy PAHs in food samples. The
optimized PTV in solvent vent mode always provided higher sensitivity than

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 267
the PTV process used in splitless mode, and improved the signal-to-noise ratio
for the heaviest PAHs (97).
The performance of different stationary phases, including typical 5%-
phenyl columns and other more polar ones, such as 50%-phenyl columns
(e.g., DB-17ms R⃝) and mid-polar to polar column (Optima R⃝δ-6) were thor-
oughly evaluated. The utilization of a 50%-phenyl column (mid-polar phase)
solved the resolution problems of three groups of co-eluted PAHs (Figure 1)
(104). Benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene, and benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene
data were reported as their sum, because of substantial co-elution. Although
the use of comprehensive GC × GC may allow separation PAHs from matrix in-
terferences in vegetable oil or ﬁsh samples, it did not succeed in improving the
separation of critical pairs of PAHs (107,108). Insufﬁcient resolution was re-
ported also for cyclopenta[cd]pyrene, which interfered with benz[a]anthracene,
and for indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene and dibenz[a,h]anthracene (Figure 2). Cur-
rently, commercially available Select PAH R⃝columns were designed speciﬁ-
cally for the PAH analysis, and provide satisfactory separation of all groups
of PAHs (both EPA and EU priority PAHs) by one-dimensional GC (109). How-
ever, baseline separation of chrysene from the isobaric triphenylene is not pos-
sible with this column (110).
Detection of PAHs following GC separation is most commonly accom-
plished by use of quadrupole electron ionization (EI) MS. In contrast with
many other organic contaminants, most PAHs yield intense molecular ions
with little fragmentation in this ionization mode. The number of fragments
produced is extremely low, mainly the [M-H]+ or [M-2H]+ ions are observed
(83). GC/MS operating in the selective ion monitoring (SIM) mode has advan-
tages over full-scan mode, for example lower detection limits and speciﬁc mon-
itoring capabilities can be achieved. In general, ease of operation and reason-
able purchase and operating costs have enabled GC/MS to become a popular
method for the determination of PAHs in laboratories worldwide (105). The
application of tandem MS and other advanced analyzers provides an increase
in selectivity. GC/MS/MS compared to GC/MS shows a ﬁve times increase
in sensitivity in ﬁsh matrix. PAHs are highly condensed and stable, so the
M+• →
M+• pseudo-transition can be monitored. Their stability increases
with the number of condensed rings. For this reason, the energy in the colli-
sion cell is increased from 25 to 35 eV for dibenz[a,h]anthracene, indeno[1,2,3-
cd]pyrene, and benzo[ghi]perylene to cause a loss of two protons and to gen-
erate the [M-2H]+ ion. This second ionization causes a decrease in noise by
fragmenting the co-extracted substances co-eluted with PAHs, whereas PAHs
are only weakly affected. Because the noise caused by co-extracted lipophilic
substances is reduced, the signal-to-noise ratio of PAHs increased simultane-
ously (87). The application of GC with atmospheric pressure laser ionization
(APLI) MS detection, as used for the determination of PAHs in environmental
samples, has not been reported yet in food analysis (111).

268
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Figure 1: Gas chromatographic separation of critical pairs/triplets on different columns
stationary phases. (A) DB-17MS column, 60 m length, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm ﬁlm thickness; (B)
DB-5MS column, 60 m length, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm ﬁlm thickness; (C) Optima R⃝δ-6 column,
30 m length, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm ﬁlm thickness (102); (D) Select PAH, 15 m lenght, 0.25 mm
i.d., 0.1 μm ﬁlm thickness (chromatogram was taken from authors experimental results).(BaA
= benz[a]anthracene, CPP = cyclopenta[cd]pyrene, CHR = chrysene, Trp = triphenylene,
BbF = benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, BkF = benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene, BjF = benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene, DhA =
dibenz[ah]anthracene, IcP = indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene.) C⃝Springer Science and Business
Media. Reproduced by permission of Springer Science and Business Media. Permission to
reuse must be obtained from the rightsholder.
In recent years, time-of-ﬂight (TOF) MS with GC and LC has become
increasingly prominent in food analysis. The unique aspect of this detec-
tion method is that accurate mass measurements and full-scan data can be
acquired. Because of its high mass resolving power, TOF MS can enable

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 269
Figure 2: GC x GC separation of PAHs in edible oil sample with highlighted critical
non-separated groups of PAHs (BaA = benz[a]anthracene, CPP = cyclopenta[cd]pyrene
and BbF = benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, BjF = benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene, BkF = benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene).
Reprinted from, Purcaro et al. (107), C⃝Elsevier. Reproduced by permission of Elsevier.
Permission to reuse must be obtained from the rightsholder.
better structural conformation and better signal-to-noise ratios than single
quadrupole analyzers, especially with complex samples (112).
In conclusion, the popularity of capillary GC for the determination of
PAHs is based on a favorable combination of better selectivity and sensitiv-
ity compared to that achieved by HPLC. The presence of co-extracted com-
pounds in samples can interfere with the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of
PAHs by HPLC. The ease of use and compatibility with MS detection are
additional reasons why many analysts prefer this technique. On the other
hand, HPLC is better able to separate individual isomers such as benzo[b]
ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[j]ﬂuoranthene,
benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene,
and
chrysene/
triphenylene. Standard deviations indicated that repeatability of both meth-
ods is sufﬁcient, being usually within 10%. The 16 EPA PAHs can be simulta-
neously separated by HPLC using gradient elution and detected by FLD with
seven settings of programmable wavelengths. The retention times by HPLC
were shorter than those by GC (113,114).
For most of the PAHs with three, four, and ﬁve rings, the recoveries and re-
peatability of measurements were in a satisfactory range. On the other hand,
lower recoveries and poor RSDs were observed in some reported methods for
the more volatile PAHs such as naphthanalene, acenaphthene, acenaphthy-
lene, and ﬂuorene (71,72,77,84–86). This phenomenon was neither detection

270
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
technique-dependent nor linked to a particular sample extraction or puriﬁca-
tion technique. Therefore, special precaution should be taken in the determi-
nation of PAHs with higher volatility, including gentle treatment of the sam-
ple during the extraction and puriﬁcation. Some laboratories also experienced
high blank levels of low mass weight PAHs, which could originate from solvent
impurities (81,82,96).
As a part of a collaborative study on the analysis of PAHs in edible oils,
results obtained by either using HPLC/FLD or GC/MS were evaluated. Dif-
ferences related to chromatographic methods were not found and stressed the
suitability of both techniques for PAH analysis with satisfactory selectivity and
sensitivity. About 95% of the laboratories were able to quantify benzo[a]pyrene
together with ﬁve other PAHs included in the commonly known list of 16 EPA
PAHs (100).
OCCURRENCE OF PAHS IN FOODS
Food consumption is an important pathway for human exposure to environ-
mental contaminants. The contribution by food ingestion to the total intake of
PAHs was compared in Europe with the intake from drinking water and in-
halation of air (1). Food consumption was shown to be the main source of PAH
intake and thus highlighted the importance of research on PAHs in food and
the development of mitigation strategies to reduce their contents in food (1).
PAHs might occur in fats and oils such as sunﬂower, olive, soybean, palm,
and rapeseed oils. Vegetable oils, naturally free of PAHs, can be contaminated
by PAHs during their production (heating processes or extraction with organic
solvents) or through air or contact with smoke from fuel combustion (115).
Some methods exist to remove PAHs during oil reﬁning, for instance the use
of active carbon or steam distillation processes (116, 117). The average sum
of PAHs in virgin olive oil was found to be higher than for olive oils (a blend
of reﬁned and virgin oils) and olive pomace oils (86,118). For sunﬂower oils,
50% or more of the total concentration of 18 PAHs analyzed (15 EPA PAHs)
belonged to the group of carcinogenic PAHs (3.7 μg/kg out of 7.4 μg/kg and
93 μg/kg out of 172 μg/kg), while for vegetable oils in general (olive oils,
rapeseed oils, sesame oils) less than 25% of the total PAH content was consti-
tuted by the genotoxic compounds (86). The majority of PAHs (usually 90%)
found in vegetable oils belong to the class of light PAHs; only sunﬂower (about
50% light PAHs) and rapeseed oils (70% light PAHs) contain an increased
proportion of heavier PAHs. The content of benzo[a]pyrene in oils is usually
below 2 μg/kg (86).
The average content of PAHs is lower in ﬁsh musculature than in the tis-
sues of mollusks, since ﬁsh (in contrast to bivalves) have the ability to oxidize
and further metabolize PAHs to water-soluble compounds that are excreted by
the living organism. Mostly the edible part of ﬁsh from unpolluted seas not

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 271
contain detectable amounts of benzo[a]pyrene. Only four low molecular weight
PAHs were reported in some ﬁsh species (sardine, horse mackerel, chub mack-
erel), namely naphthalene, acenaphthene, ﬂuorene, and phenanthrene. Nei-
ther high molecular weight PAHs nor benzo[a]pyrene were detected (84). These
results were conﬁrmed by the study on the same ﬁsh species, where just three
low molecular weight PAHs (acenaphthene, ﬂuorene, and phenanthrene) were
found. The sum of their contents ranged from 0.73 μg/kg to 6.6 μg/kg (95). A
similar PAH proﬁle was observed for catﬁsh (94). The dominant PAH measured
in tuna samples was naphthalene (119).
The average concentration of benzo[a]pyrene in bivalve mollusks is mostly
much below 10 μg/kg. However, samples taken from polluted waters may con-
tain higher amounts (113). Cultured and native mussels were used to eval-
uate the contamination by PAHs, ranging from uncontaminated aquaculture
areas to low and moderately contaminated coastal regions up to a chronically
contaminated bay region. Cultured mussels from the farms contained lower
amounts of 16 EPA PAHs (20.31–23.90 μg/kg), with a predominance of naph-
thalene, phenanthrene, ﬂuoranthene, chrysene, and benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene. The
levels found in the mussels from coastal areas located in a low urbanized re-
gion were slightly higher ranging from 21.85 to 49.60 μg/kg for the total 16
PAH content. The occurrence of 4–6 ring PAHs suggested the presence of PAHs
derived from petrogenic and pyrogenic sources. The mussels from the urban
bay area showed highest contamination levels with total amounts between
69.30 μg/kg and 238.93 μg/kg (76). In the edible parts of shellﬁsh, the con-
tent of benzo[a]pyrene is below the detection limits or not higher than a few
μg/kg (94).
Smoke is generated by thermal pyrolysis of hard wood when there is lim-
ited access to oxygen. The temperature of smoke generally plays an impor-
tant role because the amount of PAHs in smoke formed during pyrolysis in-
creases linearly with the smoking temperature within the interval 400–1000◦C
(120). Direct exposure of meat or ﬁsh products to smoke results in higher PAH
contents compared to indirect smoking methods. Also, hot smoking resulted
in higher PAH levels than cold smoking (120). Un-smoked salmon is usu-
ally of low contamination. PAHs of low molecular weight are predominant
but in low concentrations (from 0.06 to 0.19 μg/kg). Salmon smoked by four
different industrial cold-smoking processes (smoldering, thermostated plates,
friction, and liquid smoke) were investigated for PAH occurrence. Whatever
the setting of the parameters, all smoking processes led to higher levels of
PAHs of low molecular weight. The concentrations of PAH from ﬂuorene to
ﬂuoranthene varied between 1 μg/kg and 5 μg/kg. Smoldering gave the high-
est and liquid smoke the lowest levels of low molecular weight PAHs (87).
Only three PAHs were detected in a commercial smoked salmon: naphtha-
lene, phenanthrene, and ﬂuoranthene with concentrations from 11 μg/kg to
27 μg/kg (80). Another study reported slightly higher levels of individual

272
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
PAHs in smoked salmon ranging between 5 μg/kg and 60 μg/kg with ﬂuo-
ranthene and benzo[ghi]perylene displaying the lowest levels and naphtha-
lene and pyrene consistently accounting for more than 70% of total PAHs (91).
Meat samples have been extensively monitored for PAHs, especially smoked
meat products. The number of PAHs detected in smoked sausage and smoked
pork sausages varied from 6 to 12 out of 16 EPA PAHs with levels from 3 μg/kg
to 52 μg/kg (80). Commercial smoked meat products showed low PAH content
with benzo[a]pyrene concentration not exceeding 0.1 μg/kg. Higher levels could
be observed in products, where the smoking was carried out in a traditional
way, putting the meat near the ﬁreplace for several days (e.g., Italian smoked
sausage Pitina) (85). The study on the occurrence of PAHs in cheese smoked by
various processes also conﬁrmed the inﬂuence of the smoking process on PAH
levels. In general, commercial smoked cheese is of lower contamination (sum of
PAHs 2.3–57 μg/kg) than the traditionally “home-made” cheese (sum of PAHs
73–114 μg/kg), while 70–90% of total PAHs were those with three aromatic
rings (77). Higher contamination of this traditional cheese was obviously due
to the deposition of PAH containing solid particles on its surface. Puriﬁcation
of the smoke generated in industrial smoking processes allows only ﬂavoring
compound to reach the products while most of the hazardous compounds of
wood pyrolysis are removed (77).
The effects of frying, grilling, roasting, toasting, using domestic cooking ap-
pliances, and barbecuing were investigated by carrying out controlled cooking
experiments for a range of foods including sausages, beef, burgers, chicken, and
lamb. Overall, barbecued beef burgers contained the highest levels of PAHs,
with benzo[a]pyrene concentrations of up to 29 μg/kg. Beef burgers cooked
at a larger distance (7 cm above charcoal) contained higher PAH concentra-
tions than those cooked at a smaller distance (4 cm above charcoal). However,
sausages were found to contain highest concentration when cooked 4 cm above
charcoal. In general, barbecuing with charcoal plus wood chips gave the high-
est levels of benzo[a]pyrene. Extended cooking time resulted in moderate in-
creases of PAHs for some types of barbecued food. The changes in PAH levels
are likely to be inﬂuenced by differences in the surface area, the surface tex-
ture and the manner in which fat is lost during cooking (121).
Among the 16 EPA PAHs studied in heat-treated milk only 8 PAHs
were detected: phenanthrene, anthracene, and pyrene with the highest levels
and benz[a]anthracene, chrysene, benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene, benzo[a]pyrene, and
benzo[ghi]pyrene with lower levels. The total PAH levels found in pasteurized
(6.52 μg/kg) and UHT whole milk (7.75 μg/kg) were higher than in raw milk
(5.43 μg/kg). The total PAH levels in UHT whole milk were higher (7.75 μg/kg)
than in UHT semi-skimmed milk (5.94 μg/kg), which is caused by the differ-
ences in fat content (122). A national survey of toxic pollutants in the United
States milk supply was carried out in 2000 and 2001. Eight PAHs were mon-
itored in addition to other pollutants. Based on the grand composite mean

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 273
across the seasons, the national average PAH levels ranged from non-detect
(< 40 ng/L) to 777 ng/L (123). Naphthalene and phenanthrene had the highest
grand composite values in both winter and summer season. Acenaphthene and
benzo[a]pyrene were not detected in any sample (123).
Roasting is a crucial step for the production of coffee as it enables the de-
velopment of color and ﬂavor, which are essential for the characterization of
the coffee quality. The presence of PAHs in coffee samples has also been re-
ported and may be attributed to either contamination of the initial green beans
or formation of these compounds during the roasting step. With regard to in-
dividual PAHs in roasted coffee, the most abundant compounds are phenan-
threne, ﬂuoranthene, and pyrene with concentrations in the range 3–50 μg/kg.
Signiﬁcant concentrations of benz[a]anthracene and chrysene were also found
for strong roasted coffee with levels near 13 μg/kg for both compounds (26).
Benzo[a]pyrene was reported in commercially ground and instant coffees in the
range from <0.01 μg/kg to 1.2 μg/kg (124, 125). Results for coffee brew showed
similarities with ground coffee; phenanthrene, ﬂuoranthene, and pyrene were
the main PAHs, with concentrations ranging from 0.078 μg/L to 0.79 μg/L
(124). The measured values in coffee brew indicate that coffee does not sig-
niﬁcantly contribute to the daily human intake of carcinogenic PAHs (126).
Tea is, next to water, the most widely consumed beverage in the world.
Recent studies showed that tea leaves may contain contaminants that can be
released into infusions and might be harmful to human health. A wide variety
of PAHs was detected in tea leaves, particularly in smoked and non-smoked
leaves. Benzo[a]pyrene in non-smoked tea leaves ranged from 0.6 μg/kg to
5.6 μg/kg and in smoked from 2.8 μg/kg to 21.9 μg/kg (27). Signiﬁcant levels
were also published for benz[a]anthracene and chrysene. Even higher concen-
trations were measured in Mate tea leaves. Mate is a tea-like plant native in
subtropical South America. It is dried over a wood ﬁre, which might explain
the high PAH contamination. Tea leaves are normally not consumed them-
selves but used for the preparation of infusions. Recent studies showed that
the PAH concentrations in infusions are far lower than those measured in the
corresponding tea leaves. The release of PAHs from tea increased with infusion
time and therefore this time should be kept to a minimum for teas with high
amounts of PAHs, like smoked tea and Mate tea (27,127).
Vegetables are important constituents of the human diet across the world
both in terms of quantities consumed and nutritional value. PAHs have been
detected in various vegetables. Although the reported levels are overall rather
low compared with those in seeds, edible oils, and smoked meat, the frequent
occurrence of PAHs contamination and the large vegetable consumption can
also make them a signiﬁcant source to human exposure. The principal path-
way for contamination of vegetables with PAHs is gas and particle deposi-
tion, while in some cases a signiﬁcant uptake of PAHs from soil was observed
(128,129). The predominant PAHs in vegetables are those with two and three

274
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
rings, whereas the four-ring PAHs are usually absent. Considering the veg-
etable categories, the highest levels of total PAHs were found in lettuce (up
to 96.98 μg/kg), suggesting a higher accumulation on the large surface area
of vegetable leaves (89). PAH levels differed signiﬁcantly between sampling
locations. Samples growing in highly industrialized areas or near roadways,
or irrigated with wastewater generally showed higher levels than those from
rural areas. Vegetables collected from the vicinity of a power plant site in In-
dia were signiﬁcantly more polluted with PAHs compared to vegetables from
an environment that contained PAHs only at the general background level.
The contents of PAHs in vegetables from the power plant site ranged from
0.07 μg/g to 1.1 μg/g. The variation of PAH levels between different vegeta-
bles was also signiﬁcant with highest concentrations in spinach followed by
radish and bottle gourd, which could be explained by the greater surface area
of the leafy parts that facilitate atmospheric deposition. The most abundant
PAH species in vegetables from the power plant site were acenaphthene, ﬂu-
oranthene, ﬂuorene, and pyrene. The percentage contributions of carcinogenic
PAHs to total PAHs were 0.4% in cowpea, 5% in bottle gourd, 8% in spinach,
and 11% in radish (69).
According to EFSA’s ﬁndings, cereals and cereal based products are the
main source of human exposure to PAHs, mainly due to the high amounts
consumed (1,2). Contamination of bread by PAHs can be caused by both
the contamination of bakery raw materials, primarily ﬂour, and the baking
process. Similar proﬁles of PAHs were observed in all analyzed kinds of bread.
Low levels of PAHs were found primarily for the four low molecular weight
PAHs (phenanthrene, anthracene, ﬂuoranthene, and pyrene). They consti-
tuted around 90% of all PAHs determined in different variants of wheat-rye
bread, rye bread, and wholemeal rye bread. However, detectable levels of
benz[a]anthracene, chrysene, benzo[b]ﬂuoranthene, and benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene
were also reported. Furthermore, benzo[a]pyrene was detected only in the
crust of wholemeal rye bread at the highest temperature of baking (260◦C). In
general, for all kinds of bread, the highest total PAH contents were found in
the crust (up to 13 μg/kg for the sum of 19 PAHs), and the lowest in the crumb
(130).
Relatively high levels of PAHs were reported for various individual food
supplements often containing botanical ingredients such as ginkgo, ginseng,
green tea, spirulina, or bee products such as propolis. In samples analyzed in
the period from 2003 up to and including 2007, benzo[a]pyrene was present in
44% of the food supplements with the lower-bound mean level of 3.37 μg/kg.
In the survey from 2008 until 2009, 63% of the food supplements contained
PAHs with a lower-bound mean value for benzo[a]pyrene of 5.33 μg/kg (28).
Propolis samples were characterized by very different PAH contents, with
benzo[a]pyrene ranging from 0.7 μg/kg to 1371 μg/kg. However, chrysene
was always the most abundant PAH with amounts between 4.7 μg/kg and

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 275
3176 μg/kg. Lower levels of benzo[a]pyrene were found in the propolis ex-
tracts ranging from the limit of quantiﬁcation to 41.8 μg/kg (131). It can be
concluded that use at the maximum recommended dose levels of individual
food supplements, especially those containing certain botanicals or propolis,
can contribute signiﬁcantly to the total dietary intake of this class of contam-
inants (e.g., for the propolis extracts the benzo[a]pyrene intake corresponding
to about 15–30% of the EFSA European dietary exposure level (3.9–6.5 ng kg
bw−1day−1) (2,131).
In conclusion, from the group of 16 EPA PAHs the substances with low
molecular weight (up to molecular mass of 202 atom mass units) are primarily
found in food. However, it has to be stressed that these compounds have a lower
toxicity proﬁle compared to the high molecular weight members of the EPA list.
The relevance of the low molecular weight PAHs for dietary intake was also
conﬁrmed by the study on the dietary exposure to PAHs in Spain (39). The
highest individual PAH levels corresponded to phenanthrene (26.66 μg/kg),
naphthalene (25.87 μg/kg), and ﬂuoranthene (13.66 μg/kg), while the lowest
levels were reported for benzo[a]pyrene (1.28 μg/kg) and benzo[k]ﬂuoranthene
(1.31 μg/kg). With respect to food groups, the highest levels of total PAHs were
detected in meat and meat products (25.56 μg/kg), oils and fats (23.48 μg/kg)
and cereals (20.44 μg/kg). For the average male adult (70-kg body weight),
the dietary intake of the sum of PAHs was higher (12.0 μg/day) in 2006 than
that found in 2000 (8.4 μg/day). The reported results pointed out the need for
monitoring programs for PAHs in food in order to map the changes in dietary
intake of these pollutants (39).
CONCLUSIONS
The determination of PAHs in foodstuffs has already a long history. In the past,
only benzo[a]pyrene was targeted. Later, a high number of publications dealt
with the analysis of PAHs included in the U.S. EPA list. Since the evaluation of
the toxicological effects of PAHs has resulted in the prioritization of a different
set of compounds, which is reﬂected in EU legislation (15+1 EU priority PAHs),
scientiﬁc literature on food is more focused on these substances.
Considering the legislation on PAHs in food, the most comprehensive reg-
ulations are given in the European Union for different food categories in which
higher levels of PAHs could be expected. Maximum limits are set for a group
of four PAHs including benzo[a]pyrene. Regarding other countries, maximum
limits are rare. If maximum levels are set for PAHs, they usually comprise
benzo[a]pyrene only in matrices such as drinking water and sporadically in
olive oils.
There is still a lack of standardized methods for the analysis of PAHs; how-
ever, a number of in-house validated methods are reported in the literature.

276
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Because the concentrations of PAHs in food are very low, generally in the range
of ppb units, the methods usually consist of several extraction and sample pu-
riﬁcation steps to reach the low detection limits. Some researchers reported
difﬁculties to achieve sufﬁcient recovery rates and repeatability for the deter-
mination of the low molecular weight PAHs with two or three benzene rings.
Another problem area is still the insufﬁcient gas chromatographic separation
of some of the higher molecular weight PAHs.
The occurrence of PAHs in food has been extensively studied in countries
all over the world. Data from surveys indicate that the most abundant PAHs
in foodstuffs are the low molecular weight PAHs from the EPA list (particu-
larly those of two or three benzene rings). These PAHs are less relevant from
the toxicological point of view and do not contribute to the genotoxic and car-
cinogenic potential of PAHs. High contents of genotoxic and carcinogenic com-
pounds in food were in the past and are presently still linked to poor production
practices. Surveillance schemes such as the ones implemented in the EU are
deemed necessary to monitor human exposure to PAHs via food and to take
necessary mitigation actions when and where necessary.
REFERENCES
1.
Scientiﬁc Committee on Food (SCF). Opinion of the Scientiﬁc Committee on Food
on the Risks to Human Health of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Food. (Brussels:
Scientiﬁc Committee on Food (SCF), 2002).
2.
EFSA. “Scientiﬁc Opinion of the Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain on a
request from the European Commission on Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Food.”
The EFSA Journal 724 (2008): 1–114.
3.
Harvey, R. G. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. (New York: Wiley-VCH, 1997).
4.
Howsam, M. and K. Jones, “Sources of PAHs in the Environment,” in PAHs and
Related Compounds, ed. A. Neilson, (Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 1998), 137–174.
5.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EU EPA). (cited October 19,
2013). Available from http://www.epa.gov/.
6.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). (cited October 19, 2013).
Available from http://www.iarc.fr/.
7.
Scientiﬁc Committee on Food (SCF). (cited October 19, 2013). Available from http:
//ec.europa.eu/food/fs/sc/scf/reports en.html.
8.
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). (cited October 5,
2013). Available from http://www.who.int/foodsafety/chem/jecfa/en/.
9.
International Programme on chemical Saffety (IPCS). (cited October 15, 2013).
Available from http://www.who.int/ipcs/en/.
10.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). (cited September 22, 2013). Available
from http://www.efsa.europa.eu/.
11.
US Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR). (cited November 8,
2013). Available from http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/spl/.

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 277
12.
Mumtaz, M. and J. George. “Toxicological Proﬁle for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydro-
carbons (PAHs),” in ed. Public Health Service, US Department of Health and Human
Services, (Atlanta: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 1995), 487.
13.
Culp, S. J., D. W. Gaylor, W. G. Sheldon, L. S. Goldstein, and F. A. Beland. “A Com-
parison of the Tumors Induced by Coal Tar and Benzo[a]pyrene in a 2-year Bioassay.”
Carcinogenesis 19 (1998): 117–124.
14.
European Union. Commission Recommendation of February 4, 2005 on the Fur-
ther Investigation into the Levels of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Certain Foods
(2005/108/EC). Ofﬁcial Journal of European Union L34/43 2005.
15.
Cooke, M. I. S. O. P. A. H. “Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons : Physical and Bi-
ological Chemistry,” presented at the Sixth International Symposium (on Polynuclear
Aromatic Hydrocarbons), Oct. 27–29, 1981, Battelle Columbus Laboratories, (Colum-
bus, Ohio: Battelle Press, 1982).
16.
Edwards, N. T. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH’s) in the Terrestrial En-
vironment - A Review.” Journal of Environmental Quality 12 (1983): 427–441.
17.
Nielsen, T., H. E. Jørgensen, J. C. Larsen, and M. Poulsen. “City Air Pollution
of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Other Mutagens: Occurrence, Sources and
Health Effects.” Science of The Total Environment 189–190 (1996): 41–49.
18.
Phillips, D. H. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in the Diet.” Mutation Re-
search/Genetic Toxicology and Environmental Mutagenesis 443 (1999): 139–147.
19.
Afolabi, O. A., E. A. Adesulu, and O. L. Oke. “Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons
in Some Nigerian Preserved Freshwater Fish Species.” Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry 31 (1983): 1083–1090.
20.
Fretheim, K. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Grilled Meat Products—A Re-
view.” Food Chemistry 10 (1983): 129–139.
21.
Mottier, P., V. Parisod, and R. J. Turesky. “Quantitative Determination of Poly-
cyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Barbecued Meat Sausages by Gas Chromatography
Coupled to Mass Spectrometry.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 48 (2000):
1160–1166.
22.
Dav´ıdek, J. Natural Toxic Compounds of Foods. Formation and Change during
Processing and Storage. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Inc., 1995).
23.
Moreda, W., M. C. P´erez-Camino, and A. Cert. “Gas and Liquid Chromatography
of Hydrocarbons in Edible Vegetable Oils.” Journal of Chromatography A 936 (2001):
159–171.
24.
ˇSimko, P. “Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Smoked Meat
Products and Smoke Flavouring Food Additives.” Journal of Chromatography B 770
(2002): 3–18.
25.
Codex Alimentarius, International Food Standards. Code of Practice for the Re-
duction of Contamination of Food with Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) from
Smoking and Direct Drying Processes. Codex Alimentarius, CAC/RCP 68–2009 (2009).
26.
Houessou, J. K., S. Maloug, A.-S. Leveque, C. Delteil, B. Heyd, and V. Camel. “Ef-
fect of Roasting Conditions on the Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Content in Ground
Arabica Coffee and Coffee Brew.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 55 (2007):
9719–9726.
27.
Pincemaille, J., C. Schummer, E. Heinen, and G. Moris. “Determination of Poly-
cyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Smoked and Non-Smoked Black Teas and Tea Infu-
sions.” Food Chemistry 145 (2014): 807–813.

278
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
28.
Martena, M. J., M. M. P. Grutters, H. N. De Groot, E. J. M. Konings, and I. M. C. M.
Rietjens. “Monitoring of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) in Food Supplements
Containing Botanicals and Other Ingredients on the Dutch Market.” Food Additives &
Contaminants: Part A 28 (2011): 925–942.
29.
Jira, W. “A GC/MS Method for the Determination of Carcinogenic Polycyclic Aro-
matic Hydrocarbons (PAH) in Smoked Meat Products and Liquid Smokes.” European
Food Research and Technology 218 (2004): 208–212.
30.
Karl, H. and M. Leinemann. “Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocar-
bons in Smoked Fishery Products from Different Smoking Kilns.” Zeitschrift f¨ur
Lebensmittel-Untersuchung und Forschung 202 (1996): 458–464.
31.
Lijinsky, W. and P. Shubik. “Benzo(a)pyrene and Other Polynuclear Hydrocarbons
in Charcoal-Broiled Meat.” Science 145 (1964): 53–55.
32.
Lijinsky, W. and A. E. Ross. “Production of Carcinogenic Polynuclear Hydrocar-
bons in the Cooking of Food.” Food and Cosmetics Toxicology 5 (1967): 343–347.
33.
Food
Standards
Australia
New
Zealand.
Survey
of
Polycyclic
Aromatic
Hydrocarbons
(PAH)
in
Australian
Foods.
Dietary
Exposure
Assessment
and
Risk
Characterisation
(Food
Standards
Australia
New
Zealand,
2004).
Avail-
able
from
http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/science/monitoring/surveillance/Pages/
surveyofpolycyclicar4818.aspx).
34.
Code
of
Federal
Regulations-Title
21
(Food
and
Drugs).
Available
from
http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=6e5eed4dbb321c48d7280f37e78a24b3&tpl=
/ecfrbrowse/Title21/21tab 02.tpl.
35.
US ASTDR. Toxic Substances Portal - Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarobns (PAHs).
(cited October 15, 2013]. Available from http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/phs/phs.asp?id=
120&tid=25.
36.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EC) No 208/2005. Ofﬁcial Journal of
European Union L34/3 208/2005 (2005).
37.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006. Ofﬁcial Journal of
European Union L364 1881/2006 (2006).
38.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EU) No 835/2011. Ofﬁcial Journal of
European Union L214/5 835/2011 (2011).
39.
Mart´ı-Cid, R., J. M. Llobet, V. Castell, and J. L. Domingo. “Evolution of the Dietary
Exposure to Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Catalonia, Spain.” Food and Chemical
Toxicology 46 (2008): 3163–3171.
40.
Varanasi, U. Metabolism of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in the Aquatic En-
vironment. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1989).
41.
Tuvikene, A. “Responses of Fish to Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs).”
Annales Zoologici Fennici 32 (1995): 295–309.
42.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EC) No 2065/2003 of the European
Parliament and of the Council. Ofﬁcial Journal of European Union L309/1 2065/2003
(2003).
43.
European Union. Council Directive 98/83/EC. Ofﬁcial Journal of European Union
L330/32 98/83/EC (1998).
44.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EC) No 333/2007. Ofﬁcial Journal of
European Union L88/29 333/2007 (2007).
45.
European Union. Commission Regulation (EU) No 836/2011. Ofﬁcial Journal of
European Union L215/9 836/201 (2011).

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 279
46.
Health Canada’s Food Directorate. Canadian Standards for Various Chemical
Contaminants in Foods (cited October 30, 2013). Available from http://www.hc-sc.gc.
ca/fn-an/securit/chem-chim/contaminants-guidelines-directives-eng.php.
47.
Health Canada. Environmental and Workplace Health. (cited November 30,
2013). Available from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/water-eau/benzo a pyrene/
index-eng.php.
48.
Bugang, W. and M. Woolsey. “National Food Safety Standard-Maximum Levels
of Contaminants in Food,” in ed. U. F. A. Service (Beijing: USDA Foreign Agricultural
Service, 2010).
49.
Resoluc¸ ˜ao RDC n.281 de 06 de outubro de 2003. Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao 2003.
50.
Resoluc¸ ˜ao RDC n.2 de 15 de janeiro de 2007. Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao 2007.
51.
Portaria MS n.518 de 25 de marc¸o de 2004. Di´ario Oﬁcial da Uni˜ao 2004.
52.
ISO/IEC 17025:2005 General Requirements for the Competence of Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (cited December 15, 2013). Available from http://www.iso.org/
iso/home.htm.
53.
Gowik, P. “The Validation of Methods for Regulatory Purposes in the Control of
Residues,” Journal of Chromatography A 1216 (2009): 8051–8058.
54.
Wenzl, T., R. Simon, E. Anklam, and J. Kleiner. “Analytical Methods for Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Food and the Environment Needed for New Food
Legislation in the European Union,” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 25 (2006):
716–725.
55.
EPTIS database (cited December 5, 2013). Available from http://www.eptis.bam.
de.
56.
Sykes, M., M. Rose, J. Holland, T. Wenzl, J. Kelly, and D. Anderson. “Proﬁ-
ciency Test Results for PAH Analysis are not Method-Dependent.” Analytical Methods
5 (2013): 5345–5350.
57.
ˇSkrbi´c, B., K. H´eberger, and N. Duriˇsi´c-Mladenovi´c. “Comparison of Multianalyte
Proﬁciency Test Results by Sum of Ranking Differences, Principal Component Analysis,
and Hierarchical Cluster Analysis.” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 405 (2013):
8363–8375.
58.
Zeleny, R. and H. Schimmel. “Inﬂuence of the Approach to Calibration on the
Accuracy and the Traceability of Certiﬁed Values in Certiﬁed Reference Materials.”
TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 33 (2012): 107–116.
59.
Association of Ofﬁcial Analytical Chemists. AOAC Ofﬁcial Method of Analysis.
(1975): 385–388.
60.
International Standardization Organization (ISO). (2007) ISO 15302:2007.
61.
International Standardization Organization (ISO). (2006) ISO 15753:2006.
62.
International Standardization Organization (ISO). (2009) ISO 22959:2009.
63.
International Standardization Organization (ISO). (2004) PD ISO/TR 24054.
64.
Drabova, L., J. Pulkrabova, K. Kalachova, T. Cajka, V. Kocourek, and J. Hajslova.
Institute of Chemical Technology Prague (ICT). ”Rapid Method for Simultaneous De-
termination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs), Polychlorinated Biphenyls
(PCBs) and Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers (PBDEs) in Fish and Seafood using GC-
TOFMS (Prague: Institute of Chemical Technology Prague (ICT), 2010).
65.
Mastovska, K., W. R. Sorenson, and J. Hajslova. AOAC International. De-
termination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Seafood using Gas

280
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry: A Collaborative Study (AOAC International,
2011).
66.
J´ansk´a, M., M. Tomaniov´a, J. Hajˇslov´a, and V. Kocourek. “Optimization of the
Procedure for the Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and their Deriva-
tives in Fish Tissue: Estimation of Measurements Uncertainty.” Food Additives & Con-
taminants 23 (2006): 309–325.
67.
Zhao, Q., F. Wei, Y.-B. Luo, J. Ding, N. Xiao, and Y.-Q. Feng. “Rapid Magnetic Solid-
Phase Extraction Based on Magnetic Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes for the Determi-
nation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Edible Oils.” Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry 59 (2011): 12794–12800.
68.
N´acher-Mestre, J., R. Serrano, T. Portol´es-Nicolau, F. Hern´andez, L. Benedito-
Palos, and J. P´erez-S´anchez. “A Reliable Analytical Approach based on Gas Chromatog-
raphy Coupled to Triple Quadrupole and Time-of-Flight Mass Analyzers for the Deter-
mination and Conﬁrmation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Complex Matrices
from Aquaculture Activities.” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry 23 (2009):
2075–2086.
69.
Khillare, P. S., D. S. Jyethi, and S. Sarkar. “Health Risk Assessment of Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Heavy Metals via Dietary Intake of Vegetables Grown
in the Vicinity of Thermal Power Plants.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 50 (2012):
1642–1652.
70.
Fern´andez-Gonz´alez,
V.,
S.
Muniategui-Lorenzo,
P.
L´opez-Mah´ıa,
and
D.
Prada-Rodr´ıguez. “Development of a Programmed Temperature Vaporization-Gas
Chromatography–Tandem Mass Spectrometry Method for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydro-
carbons Analysis in Biota Samples at Ultratrace Levels.” Journal of Chromatography
A 1207 (2008): 136–145.
71.
Viegas, O., P. Novo, O. Pinho, and I. M. P. L. V. O. Ferreira. “A Comparison of
the Extraction Procedures and Quantiﬁcation Methods for the Chromatographic De-
termination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Charcoal Grilled Meat and Fish.”
Talanta 88 (2012): 677–683.
72.
Kumari, R., P. Chaturvedi, N. G. Ansari, R. C. Murthy, and D. K. Patel. “Optimiza-
tion and Validation of an Extraction Method for the Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons in Chocolate Candies.” Journal of Food Science 77 (2012): T34–T40.
73.
Yu, L., Y. Cao, J. Zhang, Z. Cui, and H. Sun. “Isotope Dilution-GC-MS/MS Analysis
of 16 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Selected Medicinal Herbs Used as Health
Food Additives.” Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A 29 (2012): 1800–1809.
74.
Kalachova, K., J. Pulkrabova, L. Drabova, T. Cajka, V. Kocourek, and J. Hajslova.
“Simpliﬁed and Rapid Determination of Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Polybrominated
Diphenyl Ethers, and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Fish and Shrimps Inte-
grated into a single Method.” Analytica Chimica Acta 707 (2011): 84–91.
75.
Hassan, J. and A. Farahani. “GC–MS Determination of PAHs in Fish Samples
Following Salting-out-Assisted Solvent Extraction-Gel Permeation Chromatography.”
Chromatographia 74 (2011): 477–482.
76.
Yoshimine, R. V., R. S. Carreira, A. L. Scoﬁeld, and A. L. R. Wagener. “Regional
Assessment of PAHs Contamination in SE Brazil using Brown Mussels (Perna perna
Linnaeus 1758).” Marine Pollution Bulletin 64 (2012): 2581–2587.
77.
Suchanov´a, M., J. Hajˇslov´a, M. Tomaniov´a, V. Kocourek, and L. Babiˇcka. “Poly-
cyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Smoked Cheese.” Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture 88 (2008): 1307–1317.

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 281
78.
Martinez, E., M. Gros, S. Lacorte, and D. Barcel´o. “Simpliﬁed Procedures for the
Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Water, Sediments and Mussels.” Jour-
nal of Chromatography A 1047 (2004): 181–188.
79.
Liguori, L., K. Heggstad, H. T. Hove, and K. Julshamn. “An Automated Extraction
Approach for Isolation of 24 Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) from Various Marine
matrixes.” Analytica Chimica Acta 573–574 (2006): 181–188.
80.
Wang, G., A. S. Lee, M. Lewis, B. Kamath, and R. K. Archer. “Accelerated Solvent
Extraction and Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry for Determination of Poly-
cyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Smoked Food Samples.” Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry 47 (1999): 1062–1066.
81.
Houessou, J. K., C. Delteil, and V. Camel. “Investigation of Sample Treatment
Steps for the Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Ground Coffee.” Journal
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54 (2006): 7413–7421.
82.
Lund, M., L. Duedahl-Olesen, and J. H. Christensen. “Extraction of Polycyclic Aro-
matic Hydrocarbons from Smoked Fish using Pressurized Liquid Extraction with Inte-
grated Fat Removal.” Talanta 79 (2009): 10–15.
83.
Veyrand, B., A. Brosseaud, L. Sarcher, V. Varlet, F. Monteau, P. Marchand, F. An-
dre, and B. Le Bizec. “Innovative Method for Determination of 19 Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons in Food and Oil Samples using Gas Chromatography Coupled to Tandem
Mass Spectrometry based on an Isotope Dilution Approach.” Journal of Chromatogra-
phy A 1149 (2007): 333–344.
84.
Ramalhosa, M. J., P. Pa´ıga, S. Morais, S. Ramos, C. Delerue-Matos, and M. B.
P. P. Oliveira. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Levels in Three Pelagic Fish Species
from Atlantic Ocean: Inter-Speciﬁc and Inter-Season Comparisons and Assessment of
Potential Public Health Risks.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 50 (2012): 162–167.
85.
Purcaro, G., S. Moret, and L. S. Conte. “Optimisation of Microwave Assisted Ex-
traction (MAE) for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon (PAH) Determination in Smoked
Meat.” Meat Science 81 (2009): 275–280.
86.
Fromberg, A., A. HØjg˚ard, and L. Duedahl-Olesen. “Analysis of Polycyclic Aro-
matic Hydrocarbons in Vegetable Oils Combining Gel Permeation Chromatography
with Solid-Phase Extraction Clean-Up.” Food Additives & Contaminants 24 (2007):
758–767.
87.
Varlet, V., T. Serot, F. Monteau, B. L. Bizec, and C. Prost. “Determination of PAH
Proﬁles by GC–MS/MS in Salmon Processed by Four Cold-Smoking Techniques.” Food
Additives & Contaminants 24 (2007): 744–757.
88.
Robles-Molina, J., B. Gilbert-Lopez, J. F. Garcia-Reyes, N. R. Martos, and A.
Molina-Diaz. “Multiclass Determination of Pesticides and Priority Organic Pollutants
in Fruit-based Soft Drinks by Headspace Solid-Phase Microextraction/Gas Chromatog-
raphy Tandem Mass Spectrometry.” Analytical Methods 3 (2011): 2221–2230.
89.
Lei, F.-F., J.-Y. Huang, X.-N. Zhang, X.-J. Liu, and X.-J. Li. “Determination
of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Vegetables by Headspace SPME-GC.” Chro-
matographia 74 (2011): 99–107.
90.
Kao, T. H., S. Chen, C. J. Chen, C. W. Huang, and B. H. Chen. “Evaluation of
Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons by the QuEChERS Method and Gas
Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry and Their Formation in Poultry Meat As Affected
by Marinating and Frying.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 60 (2012):
1380–1389.
91.
Forsberg, N. D., G. R. Wilson, and K. A. Anderson. “Determination of Parent and
Substituted Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in High-Fat Salmon Using a Modiﬁed

282
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
QuEChERS Extraction, Dispersive SPE and GC–MS.” Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 59 (2011): 8108–8116.
92.
Johnson, Y. S. “Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Edible
Seafood by QuEChERS-Based Extraction and Gas Chromatography-Tandem Mass
Spectrometry.” Journal of Food Science 77 (2012): T131–T137.
93.
Angioni, A., L. Porcu, M. Secci, and P. Addis. “QuEChERS Method for the De-
termination of PAH Compounds in Sardinia Sea Urchin (Paracentrotus lividus) Roe,
Using Gas Chromatography ITMS-MS Analysis.” Food Analytical Methods 5 (2012):
1131–1136.
94.
Sapozhnikova, Y. and S. J. Lehotay. “Multi-Class, Multi-Residue Analysis of Pes-
ticides, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, Polybrominated
Diphenyl Ethers and Novel Flame Retardants in Fish using Fast, Low-Pressure Gas
Chromatography–Tandem Mass Spectrometry.” Analytica Chimica Acta 758 (2013):
80–92.
95.
Jo˜ao Ramalhosa, M., P. Pa´ıga, S. Morais, C. Delerue-Matos, and M. B. Prior Pinto
Oliveira. ”Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Fish: Evaluation of a Quick,
Easy, Cheap, Effective, Rugged, and Safe Extraction Method.” Journal of Separation
Science 32 (2009): 3529–3538.
96.
Gratz, S. R., L. A. Ciolino, A. S. Mohrhaus, B. M. Gamble, J. M. Gracie, D. S. Jack-
son, J. P. Roetting, H. A. McCauley, D. T. Heitkemper, F. L. Fricke, W. J. Krol, T. L. Arse-
nault, J. C. White, M. M. Flottmeyer, and Y. S. Johnson. “Screening and Determination
of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Seafoods Using QuEChERS-Based Extraction
and High-Performance Liquid Chromatography with Fluorescence Detection.” Journal
of AOAC Internationa 94 (2011): 1601–1616.
97.
Plaza-Bola˜nos, P., A. G. Frenich, and J. L. M. Vidal. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocar-
bons in Food and Beverages. Analytical Methods and Trends.” Journal of Chromatog-
raphy A 1217 (2010): 6303–6326.
98.
Wise, S. A., L. R. Hilpert, G. D. Byrd, and W. E. May. “Comparison of Liquid Chro-
matography with Fluorescence Detection and Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry
for the Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Environmental Samples.”
Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds 1 (1990): 81–98.
99.
Simon, R., B.de laCalle, S. Palme, D. Meier, and E. Anklam. “Composition and
Analysis of Liquid Smoke Flavouring Primary Products.” Journal of Separation Science
28 (2005): 871–882.
100.
Simon, R., J. Gomez Ruiz, C. Holst, T. Wenzl, and E. Anklam. “Results of a Eu-
ropean Inter-Laboratory Comparison Study on the Determination of EU Priority Poly-
cyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Edible Vegetable Oils.” Analytical and Bioan-
alytical Chemistry 391 (2008): 1397–1408.
101.
Cai, S.-S., J. Stevens, and J. A. Syage. “Ultra High Performance Liquid
Chromatography–Atmospheric Pressure Photoionization-Mass Spectrometry for High-
Sensitivity Analysis of US Environmental Protection Agency Sixteen Priority Pollutant
Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Oysters.” Journal of Chromatography A 1227
(2012): 138–144.
102.
Cai, S.-S., J. A. Syage, K. A. Hanold, and M. P. Balogh. “Ultra Performance Liquid
Chromatography−Atmospheric Pressure Photoionization-Tandem Mass Spectrometry
for High-Sensitivity and High-Throughput Analysis of U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency 16 Priority Pollutants Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons.” Analytical Chem-
istry 81 (2009): 2123–2128.

The Occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in Food – A Review 283
103.
Short, L. C., S.-S. Cai, and J. A. Syage. “APPI-MS: Effects of Mobile Phases and
VUV Lamps on the Detection of PAH Compounds.” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry 18 (2007): 589–599.
104.
G´omez-Ruiz, J. and T. Wenzl. “Evaluation of Gas Chromatography Columns for
the Analysis of the 15 + 1 EU-Priority Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs).” An-
alytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 393 (2009): 1697–1707.
105.
Poster, D., M. Schantz, L. Sander, and S. Wise. “Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Environmental Samples: A Critical Review of Gas Chromato-
graphic (GC) Methods.” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 386 (2006): 859–881.
106.
G´omez-Ruiz, J. ´A., F. Cordeiro, P. L´opez, and T. Wenzl. “Optimisation and Valida-
tion of Programmed Temperature Vaporization (PTV) Injection in Solvent Vent Mode
for the Analysis of the 15+1 EU-Priority PAHs by GC–MS.” Talanta 80 (2009): 643–650.
107.
Purcaro, G., P. Morrison, S. Moret, L. S. Conte, and P. J. Marriott. “De-
termination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Vegetable Oils using Solid-
Phase Microextraction–Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography Cou-
pled with Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry.” Journal of Chromatography A 1161
(2007): 284–291.
108.
Kalachova, K., J. Pulkrabova, T. Cajka, L. Drabova, and J. Hajslova. “Implemen-
tation of Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography–Time-of-Flight Mass
Spectrometry for the Simultaneous Determination of Halogenated Contaminants and
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Fish.” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 403
(2012): 2813–2824.
109.
Oostdijk, J. Agilent Technologies, Inc. Separation of 54 PAHs on an Agilent J&W
Select PAH GC Column (Agilent Technologies, Inc., 2010). Available from http://www.
chem.agilent.com/Library/applications/SI-02232.pdf).
110.
Kuipers, J. and J. Oostdijk. Agilent Technologies, Inc. GC/MS Analysis of 16
EPA and (15+1) EU PAHs in Salmon using a Agilent J&W Select PAH Column (Ag-
ilent Technologies, Inc.. 2010). Available from http://www.chem.agilent.com/Library/
applications/SI-02424.pdf).
111.
Schiewek, R., M. Schellentr¨ager, R. M¨onnikes, M. Lorenz, R. Giese, K. J. Brock-
mann, S. G¨ab, T. Benter, and O. J. Schmitz. “Ultrasensitive Determination of Polycyclic
Aromatic Compounds with Atmospheric-Pressure Laser Ionization as an Interface for
GC/MS.” Analytical Chemistry 79 (2007): 4135–4140.
112.
Ferrer, I. and E. M. Thurman. “Liquid Chromatography/Time-of-Flight/Mass
Spectrometry (LC/TOF/MS) for the Analysis of Emerging Contaminants.” TrAC Trends
in Analytical Chemistry 22 (2003): 750–756.
113.
Stołyhwo, A. and Z. E. Sikorski. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Smoked
Fish – A Critical Review.” Food Chemistry 91 (2005): 303–311.
114.
Chiu, C. P., Y. S. Lin, and B. H. Chen. “Comparison of GC-MS and HPLC for
Overcoming Matrix Interferences in the Analysis of PAHs in Smoked Food.” Chro-
matographia 44 (1997): 497–504.
115.
Moret, S. and L. S. Conte. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Edible Fats and
Oils: Occurrence and Analytical Methods.” Journal of Chromatography A 882 (2000):
245–253.
116.
Arrebola, F. J., A. G. Frenich, M. J. Gonz´alez Rodr´ıguez, P. P. Bola˜nos, and J. L.
Mart´ınez Vidal. “Determination of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Olive Oil by
a Completely Automated Headspace Technique Coupled to Gas Chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry.” Journal of Mass Spectrometry 41 (2006): 822–829.

284
Z. Zelinkova and T. Wenzl
117.
Nyman, P. J., G. A. Perfetti, F. L. Joe, and G. W. Diachenko. “Comparison of Two
Clean-Up Methodologies for the Gas Chromatographic/Mass Spectrometric Determina-
tion of Low Nanogram/Gram Levels of Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Seafood.”
Food Additives & Contaminants 10 (1993): 489–501.
118.
Mafra, I., J. S. Amaral, and M. B. P. P. Oliveira. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydro-
carbons (PAH) in Olive Oils and Other Vegetable Oils; Potential for Carcinogenesis” in
Olives and Olive Oil in Health and Disease Prevention, ed. V.R. Preedy and R.R. Watson
(London: Academic Press, Elsevier, 2010): 489–498.
119.
Essumang, D. K., D. K. Dodoo, and J. K. Adjei. “Effective Reduction of PAH Con-
tamination in Smoke Cured Fish Products using Charcoal Filters in a Modiﬁed Tradi-
tional Kiln.” Food Control 35 (2014): 85–93.
120.
Roda, A., P. Simoni, E. N. Ferri, S. Girotti, A. lus, P. Rauch, M. Poplstein, M.
Pospisil, P. Pipek, I. Hochel, and L. Fukal. “Determination of PAHs in Various Smoked
Meat Products and Different Samples by Enzyme Immunoassay.” Journal of the Science
of Food and Agriculture 79 (1999): 58–62.
121.
White, S., A. Fernandes, and M. Rose. Food Standard Agency. Investigation of
the Formation of PAHs in Foods Prepared in the Home and from Catering Outlets to
Determine the Effects of Frying, Grilling, Barbecuing, Toasting and Roasting. (York,
UK: Food Standard Agency, 2008).
122.
Naccari, C., M. Cristani, F. Giofr`e, M. Ferrante, L. Siracusa, and D. Trombetta.
“PAHs Concentration in Heat-Treated Milk Samples.” Food Research International 44
(2011): 716–724.
123.
Schaum, J., L. Schuda, C. Wu, R. Sears, J. Ferrario, and K. Andrews. “A Na-
tional Survey of Persistent, Bioaccumulative, and Toxic (PBT) Pollutants in the United
States Milk Supply.” Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 13
(2003): 177–186.
124.
De Kruijf, N., T. Schouten, and G. H. D. Van der Stegen. “Rapid Determination of
Benzo[a]pyrene in Roasted Coffee and Coffee Brew by High-Performance Liquid Chro-
matography with Fluorescence Detection.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry
35 (1987): 545–549.
125.
Houessou, J. K., D. Goujot, B. Heyd, and V. Camel. “Modeling the Formation of
Some Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons During the Roasting of Arabica Coffee Sam-
ples.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 56 (2008): 3648–3656.
126.
Orecchio, S., V. P. Ciotti, and L. Culotta. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
(PAHs) in Coffee Brew Samples: Analytical Method by GC–MS, Proﬁle, Levels and
Sources.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 47 (2009): 819–826.
127.
Lin, D., L. Zhu, and L. Luo. “Factors Affecting Transfer of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons from Made Tea to Tea Infusion.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
istry 54 (2006): 4350–4354.
128.
Rojo Camargo, M. C. and M. C. l. F. Toledo. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
in Brazilian Vegetables and Fruits.” Food Control 14 (2003): 49–53.
129.
Khan, S., L. Aijun, S. Zhang, Q. Hu, and Y.-G. Zhu. “Accumulation of Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Heavy Metals in Lettuce Grown in the Soils Contaminated
with Long-Term Wastewater Irrigation.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 152 (2008):
506–515.
130.
Ciecierska, M. and M. W. Obiedzi´nski. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in the
Bakery Chain.” Food Chemistry 141 (2013): 1–9.
131.
Moret, S., G. Purcaro, and L. S. Conte. “Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs)
Levels in Propolis and Propolis-based Dietary Supplements from the Italian Market.”
Food Chemistry 122 (2010): 333–338.
