Microbes Environ. Vol. 33, No. 1, 58-65, 2018
https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/browse/jsme2  doi:10.1264/jsme2.ME17072
Evaluation of Suppressiveness of Soils Exhibiting Soil-Borne Disease Suppression 
after Long-Term Application of Organic Amendments by the Co-cultivation 
Method of Pathogenic Fusarium oxysporum and Indigenous Soil Microorganisms
Masahiro Mitsuboshi1*, Yuuzou Kioka1, Katsunori Noguchi2, and Susumu Asakawa3
1Tsukuba Research Institute, Katakura & Co-op Agri Corporation, 5–5511 Namiki, Tsuchiura, Ibaraki 300–0061, Japan; 2Katakura 
& Co-op Agri Corporation, 1–8–10 Kudankita, Chiyoda, Tokyo 102–0073, Japan; and 3Graduate School of Bioagricultural 
Sciences, Nagoya University, 1 Furo-cho, Chikusa, Nagoya, Aichi 464–8601, Japan
(Received May 2, 2017—Accepted December 2, 2017—Published online February 16, 2018)
Preventive measures against soil-borne diseases need to be implemented before cultivation because very few countermeasures 
are available after the development of diseases. Some soils suppress soil-borne diseases despite the presence of a high population 
density of pathogens. If the suppressiveness of soil against soil-borne diseases may be predicted and diagnosed for crop fields, 
it may be possible to reduce the labor and cost associated with excessive disinfection practices. We herein evaluated the sup-
pressiveness of soils in fields with the long-term application of organic amendments by examining the growth of pathogenic 
Fusarium oxysporum co-cultivated with indigenous soil microorganisms on agar plates. Soils treated with coffee residue 
compost or rapeseed meal showed suppressiveness against spinach wilt disease by F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae or spinach wilt 
and lettuce root rot diseases by F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae and F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae, respectively, and the growth of 
pathogenic Fusarium spp. on agar plates was suppressed when co-cultured with microorganisms in a suspension from these 
soils before crop cultivation. These results indicate the potential of the growth degree of pathogenic F. oxysporum estimated by 
this method as a diagnostic indicator of the suppressiveness of soil associated with the inhabiting microorganisms. A correlation 
was found between the incidence of spinach wilt disease in spinach and the growth degree of F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae by 
this co-cultivation method, indicating that suppressiveness induced by organic amendment applications against F. oxysporum 
f. sp. spinaciae is evaluable by this method. The co-cultivation method may be useful for predicting and diagnosing suppres-
siveness against soil-borne diseases.
Key words: soil-borne disease suppression, long-term application of organic amendments, biological diagnosis, Fusarium oxysporum, disease incidence
Plant diseases include those on the above-ground part of 
plants and soil-borne diseases. Effective countermeasures 
against above-ground diseases are possible by diagnosing the 
initial incidence of disease. Although this is not the case for 
soil-borne diseases, resistant cultivars, cultural pest control, 
and biological pesticides may be employed as countermeasures 
against these diseases (11). The pathogenic fungi causing 
soil-borne diseases spread throughout a field, and it is often 
too late to employ countermeasures when the early symptoms 
of a disease are detected. Thus, preventive measures need to 
be implemented before cultivation.
Some soils suppress soil-borne diseases despite the presence 
of a high population density of pathogens and are known as 
“suppressive soil”. The physicochemical and biological 
characteristics of soil contribute to this suppressiveness (5). 
The effects of organic amendments, such as livestock and 
green manure, organic waste, compost, and peat, on the sup-
pression of soil-borne pathogens have been extensively examined 
(6). If the suppressiveness of soil induced by various manage-
ment approaches such as the application of organic fertilizers 
may be predicted and diagnosed for crop fields, it will be 
possible to reduce the labor and cost associated with excessive 
disinfection practices.
Pathogenic F. oxysporum causes serious damage to various 
crop species, and the control of diseases caused by F. oxysporum 
is very challenging. Bonanomi et al. (6) analyzed an extensive 
data set of 2,423 studies to identify the characteristics of 
organic amendments to soil related to suppressiveness against 
soil-borne diseases. They found that the most useful features 
showing positive correlations with the disease suppression of 
Fusarium spp. were total fungi, total bacteria, the C to N 
ratio, pH, fluorescent pseudomonads, EC, and sporegenous 
bacteria. Previous studies investigated suppressiveness 
against Fusarium diseases. Very diverse factors including 
biotic and abiotic factors are involved in the expression of the 
suppressiveness of soil against Fusarium diseases. For example, 
the suppression of F. oxysporum f. sp. raphani by Pseudomonas 
stutzeri attaching to chlamydospores (14), the antagonism to 
F. oxysporum f. sp. raphani by microorganisms colonizing 
radish roots (15), the suppression of F. oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae by increases in microbial activity and populations 
after the application of compost (8), and the suppression of F. 
oxysporum f. sp. cubense by toxic organic acids produced in 
biological soil disinfestation (10) have been reported. It is not 
possible to examine all of these factors for their soil suppres-
siveness against Fusarium diseases, and those related to sup-
pressiveness may vary depending on the crop, Fusarium species, 
and soil conditions. Therefore, the suppressiveness of soil 
against Fusarium diseases needs to be comprehensively assessed.
In order to evaluate soil suppressiveness against soil-borne 
diseases, inoculation experiments of pathogens to plants are 
required under crop growing conditions. However, these 
experiments are laborious and a long time is needed to 
* Corresponding author. E-mail: masahiro_mitsuboshi@katakuraco-op.com; 
Tel: +81–29–832–0901; Fax: +81–29–831–7881.

Suppressiveness of Soil against Fusarium
59
observe the occurrence of diseases. It is practically impossible 
to conduct these experiments as a preventive diagnosis in 
farmers’ fields because the implementation of countermeasures 
against soil-borne diseases needs to occur before crop planting. 
Therefore, a new method that evaluates suppressiveness 
against soil-borne diseases in a short time is required. We 
herein employed and investigated the ability of a simple 
method to evaluate the suppressiveness of soil microorganisms 
against pathogenic F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae by 
co-cultivating the pathogenic fungus with indigenous soil 
microorganisms using the dilution plate technique (12). This 
method (the co-cultivation method) comprehensively estimates 
suppressiveness against a pathogen by the abundance, activity, 
and antagonistic ability of indigenous soil microorganisms. 
Suppressiveness against F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae was 
found in cow dung compost and a microbial inoculant, and 
the incidence of disease in spinach by the pathogen was 
reduced in soils treated with these organic amendments. 
Furthermore, positive correlations were observed between 
the incidence of disease in spinach and the growth degree of 
F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae on agar plates in an inoculation 
experiment of the pathogen to spinach in soils treated with 
several types of organic amendments (12). However, since 
these findings were obtained from a pot scale experiment 
using one type of soil, the applicability of the co-cultivation 
method to field soil with crop cultivation needs to be confirmed.
In the present study, the co-cultivation method (12) for 
evaluating soil suppressiveness against pathogenic Fusarium 
spp. was examined using field soils with the long-term appli-
cation of organic amendments that exhibited suppressiveness. 
Inoculation experiments of pathogenic F. oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae (spinach wilt disease) and F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae 
(lettuce root rot disease) to spinach and Boston lettuce, 
respectively, were performed for soils from two long-term 
experimental fields, and relationships between the disease 
incidence of plants and the suppressive degrees of growth of 
Fusarium spp. estimated by the co-cultivation method for soil 
before and after crop cultivation were investigated.
Materials and Methods
Soil
Soil samples were taken from a long-term experimental field with 
the application of organic fertilizers from two locations: Aichi 
prefecture and Ibaraki prefecture, Japan. Soil samples in Aichi 
prefecture (Aichi soil) were collected at the Nagoya University 
Farm, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Togo-cho, 
Aichi, Japan, on March 8, 2016. This field experiment has been 
continued since 1987 and soil was Yellow soil (Ultisols). Five plots 
were used: unfertilized plot (NF), a plot with chemical fertilizer (CF, 
500 kg N ha–1 y–1, 133 kg P2O5 ha–1 y–1, 500 kg K2O ha–1 y–1), a plot 
with chemical fertilizer and 40 t ha–1 y–1 of farmyard manure 
(CF+FYM), a plot with chemical fertilizer and 40 t ha–1 y–1 of coffee 
residue compost (CRC), and a plot with 400 t ha–1 y–1 of farmyard 
manure before 2006 or 200 t ha–1 y–1 of farmyard manure after 2006 
(FYM). Each plot was 100 m2 (4×25 m) without replication. The 
cultivation history of this field is shown in Supporting information.
Soil samples in Ibaraki prefecture (Ibaraki soil) were collected at 
the Tsukuba Research Institute Farm, Katakura Chikkarin, 
Tsuchiura, Ibaraki, Japan on March 24, 2015. This field experiment 
has been continued since 1987 and the soil was “Kuroboku” soil 
(Andosol). Five plots were used: a plot with inorganic fertilizers 
(ammonium sulfate, calcium superphosphate, and potassium chloride) 
(Cont), a plot with rapeseed meal (RSM, N-P2O5-K2O=5.3-2-1%, 
940–4,700 kg ha–1), a plot with fish meal (FM, N-P2O5-K2O=7-7-0%, 
710–3,600 kg ha–1), a plot with steamed bone meal (SBM, N-P2O5-
K2O=4-20-0%, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1), and a plot with a mixture 
of these organic fertilizers (Mix, N-P2O5-K2O=5.4-9.6-0.3%, 930–
4,600 kg ha–1). Each plot was 10 m2 in triplicate. The cultivation 
history of this field is shown in Supporting information.
The soil samples used for the inoculation experiment were placed 
in a plastic bag or container with a lid to avoid drying and stored at 
room temperature.
Chemical and microbial characteristics of soil
The pH and electrical conductivity (EC) of soil were measured in 
a water extract (5:1 [v/v]) with the pH meter M-12 (Horiba, Tokyo, 
Japan) and EC meter ES-51 (Horiba). The concentrations of elements 
were measured using the Soil & Plant Analyzer SFP-4i (Fujihira 
Industry, Tokyo, Japan) following the manufacturer’s instructions 
for soil samples air-dried at room temperature and passed through a 
2-mm sieve.
The population density of fungi was assessed by the dilution plate 
technique on rose bengal agar medium (KH2PO4 1 g, MgSO4·7H2O 
0.5 g, peptone 5 g, glucose 10 g, rose bengal 33 mg, agar 17 g, 
streptomycin 30 mg, and distilled water 1 L; pH 6.8) (3). The popu-
lations of actinomycetes and bacteria were evaluated by the dilution 
plate technique on egg albumin agar medium (egg albumin 0.25 g, 
glucose 1 g, K2HPO4 0.5 g, MgSO4·7H2O 0.2 g, Fe2 [SO4]3 trace, 
agar 15 g, and distilled water 1 L; pH 6.8) (3).
The diversity of bacterial communities was investigated by analyzing 
the 16S rRNA sequence of Ibaraki soil. DNA was extracted from 0.5 g 
of soil using the FastDNA SPIN kit for Soil (MP Biomedicals, Santa 
Ana, CA, USA) and sequencing was performed with a MiSeq 
(Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). In the analysis of alpha diversity, 
data of an array were sampled in accordance with the minimum 
number of reads with a threshold value of 97% using QIIME’s 
workflow script. Measurements were conducted for triplicate plots, 
except for Mix in which one of the triplicate plots was used.
Pathogenic fungal strain
Spinach wilt disease fungus (F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae 
MAFF 103060) and lettuce root rot fungus (F. oxysporum f. sp. 
lactucae MAFF 744028) were used.
Crop
Spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.) (“OKAME”, TAKII, Kyoto, 
Japan) and Boston lettuce (Lactuca sativa L. var. capiata) 
(“OKAYAMA SARADANA”, TAKII) were used.
Cultivation of crops and inoculation of the pathogenic F. oxysporum 
strain
Spinach seeds pretreated in water for 2 d were sown into a cell 
tray (200 holes) filled with nursery soil (“YASAI-BAIDO ICHI 
GOU”, Katakura & Co-op Agri, Tokyo, Japan) and grown in a 
greenhouse for approximately 10 d. Conidiospores of F. oxysporum 
f. sp. spinaciae were added to the soil sample collected from the 
long-term experimental field at a dose of 106 conidia g–1 soil, and 
500 mL of soil (approximately 400 g) was placed into polycarbonate 
pots (outer diameter of 12 cm×height of 11.5 cm; 0.01 m2). 
Regarding the proliferation of conidiospores, F. oxysporum was 
cultivated on potato dextrose agar (potato extract [prepared from 
1 kg potatoes boiled in 1 L of water] 100 mL, glucose 20 g, agar 
15 g, and distilled water 900 mL) at 30°C for 7 d, and a square section 
of 5 mm on each side of the fungal lawn was cultivated in 100 mL of 
potato sucrose broth (potato extract 100 mL, sucrose 20 g, and distilled 
water 900 mL) at 30°C for 7 d by shaking horizontally. The number 
of conidiospores was enumerated on a hemocytometer and diluted 
culture solutions with a predetermined density were used for the 
inoculation. Soils were fertilized with the compound inorganic 
fertilizer (N-P-K=150-300-150 kg ha–1), inoculated with the conid-
iospores, and planted with the spinach seedlings on the same day. 

Mitsuboshi et al.
60
Three spinach seedlings were planted in each pot in quadruplicate on 
April 22, 2016 (Aichi soil) and September 24, 2015 (Ibaraki soil). 
We noted the disease incidence and severity of wilting for each 
spinach plant on May 7, 2016 (15 d after planting, Aichi soil) and 
October 6, 2015 (12 d after planting, Ibaraki soil) and collected soil 
samples from the pots in order to measure the growth degree of F. 
oxysporum. The incidence and severity of wilt were evaluated as 
follows: 0, healthy; 1, one leaf had wilted; 2, two or three leaves had 
wilted; 3, half of the leaves had wilted; 4, more than half of the 
leaves had wilted; 5, dead or nearly dead.
Boston lettuce seeds were sown into a cell tray (200 holes) filled 
with nursery soil (“YASAI-BAIDO ICHI GOU”) and grown on a 
cultivation shelf in the laboratory, which was kept at 25°C. 
Conidiospores of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae were added to the 
soils at a dose of 106 conidia g–1 soil and 500 mL of the soil (approx-
imately 400 g) was placed into polycarbonate pots (outer diameter of 
12 cm×height of 11.5 cm; 0.01 m2). Soils were fertilized with the 
compound inorganic fertilizer (N-P-K=150-300-150 kg ha–1), inoc-
ulated with the conidiospores, and planted with the Boston lettuce 
seedlings on the same day. Three Boston lettuce seedlings were 
planted in each pot in triplicate on July 26, 2016 for both soils. We 
recorded the disease incidence and severity of wilting for each 
Boston lettuce plant on August 8, 2016 (13 d after planting) and 
collected soil samples from the pots in order to measure the growth 
degree of F. oxysporum. The incidence and severity of wilt were 
evaluated in the same manner as that described above for spinach.
The cultivation of spinach and Boston lettuce inoculated with the 
respective pathogenic fungus was also performed using sterilized 
CRC, FYM, and RSM soils. Soil was autoclaved at 121°C for 60 min 
in a bag and the inoculation test was performed in the same manner 
as the above method.
Soil samples were subjected to analyses by the co-cultivation 
method within two weeks of sampling and stored at 4°C before 
being analyzed.
Co-cultivation of F. oxysporum with soil microorganisms
Ten-gram portions of the soil sample, which was collected in 
triplicate before crop cultivation and from pots in quadruplicate for 
spinach or triplicate for Boston lettuce for each treatment after crop 
cultivation, were taken into a sterilized tube containing 90 mL of 
sterilized tap water and shaken reciprocally at 200 rpm for 30 min. 
One milliliter of the suspension was poured into 9 mL of sterilized 
tap water, mixed well, and serially diluted in the same manner. A 
dilution series was prepared to a magnification of 10–6 fold. A 
quantity of 1.0 mL of 10–1 to 10–6-fold diluted suspensions was 
inoculated into a petri dish and 16 mL of YPMG agar medium 
(Peptone-yeast extract medium; yeast extract 3 g, peptone 5 g, beef 
extract 3 g, glucose 10 g, agar 15 g, and distilled water 1 L; pH 7.0) 
(2) was poured and mixed. A square section of the F. oxysporum 
hyphal lawn was placed in the center of agar medium. As a control, 
sterilized water was inoculated instead of the diluted suspension of 
soil samples. Plates were incubated at 30°C for approximately one 
week (7 or 8 d), by which time the colony of F. oxysporum had 
spread fully on the control plate. The length of the shortest part of 
the colony together with the longest length was measured; i.e., the 
extension of hyphae was measured at the parts at which hyphae had 
grown the most (long diameter) and least (short diameter) in the 
colony of F. oxysporum for soil samples and the control, and the 
mean of these values was used to calculate the growth degree. As a 
representative value for the growth degree of F. oxysporum, the 
median of the estimated values of the growth degree at six dilutions 
from 10–1 to 10–6 was calculated (12).
Statistical analysis
All statistical tests were performed with Microsoft Excel 2016 for 
Windows (Microsoft, Tokyo, Japan) and Ekuseru-Toukei 2015 
(Social Survey Research Information, Tokyo, Japan). A principal 
component analysis was performed using the data of pH, EC, NH3-
N, exchangeable Mg, bacterial density, and fungal density. These 
parameters were selected by assessing similarities using a cluster 
analysis (Ward’s method) assuming the distance between variables 
using the correlation coefficient between variables. Differences in 
the disease incidence of spinach and Boston lettuce and the growth 
degree of F. oxysporum in the co-cultivation method from those in 
control plots (NF and Cont) were statistically tested with Steel’s and 
Dunnett’s tests, respectively. The relationship between the disease 
incidence of crops and the growth degree of F. oxysporum estimated 
by the co-cultivation method was analyzed by Spearman’s rho.
Results
Chemical and microbial characteristics of soil
The chemical and microbial characteristics of Aichi and 
Ibaraki soil samples are shown in Table S1. Several charac-
teristics were significantly different between Cont and the 
other plots with organic amendments in Ibaraki soil. PCA 
was performed based on chemical and microbial characteris-
tics (Fig. S1). Cont, CF, and NF were located on the second 
and third quadrants and the plots with organic amendments 
were located from the center to the first and fourth quadrants. 
FYM and CRC were located apart from the other plots with 
organic amendments in the fourth and first quadrants, respec-
tively. The diversity of bacterial communities in Ibaraki soil 
based on the elucidation of 16S rRNA sequences showed no 
significant difference among plots (Table S2).
Disease incidence of spinach and Boston lettuce planted in 
soil with the long-term application of organic amendments
In NF and Cont, a large number of leaves wilted, while 
disease incidence was relatively suppressed in CRC, FYM, 
and RSM (Fig. S2). The disease incidence of spinach was 
significantly lower in CRC (P=0.001) and FYM (P=0.000) 
than in NF in Aichi soil, and was also significantly lower in 
RSM (P=0.007) and FM (P=0.023) than in Cont in Ibaraki 
soil (Fig. 1A and C). The disease incidence of Boston lettuce 
was significantly lower in FYM (P=0.001) and RSM 
(P=0.042) than in NF and Cont in Aichi and Ibaraki soils, 
respectively (Fig. 1B and D). When soil was sterilized, the 
disease incidence of spinach increased in CRC, whereas it 
was maintained at a low level in FYM and RSM. The disease 
incidence of Boston lettuce increased in CRC and FYM, but 
did not significantly increase in RSM after soil sterilization 
(Fig. S3). Disease was observed in spinach or Boston lettuce 
grown on soil without the inoculation of pathogenic F. 
oxysporum (data not shown).
Growth degree of F. oxysporum for soil
The growth degree of F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae was 
significantly lower in CRC (P=0.000) than in NF before 
spinach cultivation in Aichi soil (Fig. 2A). After crop cultivation, 
the growth degree of F. oxysporum was significantly lower in 
CRC (P=0.011) and FYM (P=0.029) than in NF (Fig. 2B). In 
Ibaraki soil, the degree of F. oxysporum proliferation was 
significantly lower in RSM than in Cont (P=0.001 [before crop 
cultivation] and P=0.000 [after crop cultivation], Fig. 2C and D).
The growth degree of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae was 
significantly lower in CRC (P=0.001) than in NF before 
Boston lettuce cultivation in Aichi soil (Fig. 3A). After crop 
cultivation, no significant differences were observed in the 

Suppressiveness of Soil against Fusarium
61
growth degree of F. oxysporum (Fig. 3B). Before crop culti-
vation in Ibaraki soil, the growth degree of F. oxysporum was 
significantly lower in RSM (P=0.000) than in Cont (Fig. 3C). 
After crop cultivation, the growth degree of F. oxysporum 
was significantly lower in RSM (P=0.000) and Mix (P=0.005) 
than in Cont (Fig. 3D).
Fig.  1.  Disease incidence of spinach by Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae (A, C) and Boston lettuce by 
F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae (B, D) in Aichi soil (A, B) 
and Ibaraki soil (C, D). NF, unfertilized; CF, chemical 
fertilizer; CF+FYM, chemical fertilizer and 40 t ha–1 y–1 
farmyard manure; CRC, chemical fertilizer and 40 t ha–1 y–1 
coffee residue compost; FYM, 400 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard 
manure. Cont, compound inorganic fertilizers; RSM, 
940–4,700 kg ha–1 rapeseed meal; FM, 710–3,600 kg ha–1 
fish meal; SBM, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1 steamed bone meal; 
Mix, 930–4,600 kg ha–1 mixture of rapeseed meal, fish 
meal, and steamed bone meal. Values show the median 
with the upper and lower quartile points (A, C: n=12; B, 
D: n=9). * and ** indicate significant differences from NF 
or Cont at P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively.
Fig.  2.  Growth degree of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae based on an estimation of the extension length 
of the colony for Aichi (A, B) and Ibaraki (C, D) soils 
with the cultivation of spinach. Values show the mean of 
growth degrees at each dilution with SE before (A, C) 
(n=3) and after crop cultivation (B, D) (n=4). NF, unfertil-
ized; CF, chemical fertilizer; CF+FYM, chemical fertilizer 
and 40 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard manure; CRC, chemical fertilizer 
and 40 t ha–1 y–1 coffee residue compost; FYM, 400 t ha–1 y–1 
farmyard manure; Cont, compound inorganic fertilizers; RSM, 
940–4,700 kg ha–1 rapeseed meal; FM, 710–3,600 kg ha–1 
fish meal; SBM, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1 steamed bone meal; 
Mix, mixture of rapeseed meal, fish meal, and steamed 
bone meal. The extension lengths for control plates were 
42.0 (A), 37.0 (B), 40.0 (C), and 39.0 (D) mm.
Fig.  3.  Growth degree of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
lactucae based on an estimation of the extension length of 
the colony for Aichi (A, B) and Ibaraki (C, D) soils with 
the cultivation of Boston lettuce. Values show the mean of 
growth degrees at each dilution with SE before (A, C) 
(n=3) and after crop cultivation (B, D) (n=3). NF, unfertil-
ized; CF, chemical fertilizer; CF+FYM, chemical fertilizer 
and 40 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard manure; CRC, chemical fertilizer 
and 40 t ha–1 y–1 coffee residue compost; FYM, 400 t ha–1 y–1 
farmyard manure; Cont, compound inorganic fertilizers; RSM, 
940–4,700 kg ha–1 rapeseed meal; FM, 710–3,600 kg ha–1 
fish meal; SBM, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1 steamed bone meal; 
Mix, 930–4,600 kg ha–1 mixture of rapeseed meal, fish 
meal, and steamed bone meal. The extension lengths for 
control plates were 36.0 (A, B) and 35.0 (C, D) mm.

Mitsuboshi et al.
62
The representative value of the growth degree based on the 
extension length of the colonies (median value) was signifi-
cantly lower for CRC than for NF (P=0.023) before spinach 
cultivation in Aichi soil (Fig. 4A). After crop cultivation, the 
median value of F. oxysporum was not significantly different 
in Aichi soil (Fig. 4B). Before crop cultivation in Ibaraki soil, 
median values were significantly lower in RSM (P=0.041) 
and FM (P=0.023) than in Cont (Fig. 4C). The median value 
was significantly lower in RSM (P=0.035) than in Cont (Fig. 
4D) after crop cultivation.
The median value of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae was 
significantly lower in CRC (P=0.033) than in NF before 
Boston lettuce cultivation in Aichi soil (Fig. 5A). The median 
value of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae was not significantly 
different after crop cultivation in Aichi soil or before crop 
cultivation in Ibaraki soil (Fig. 5B and C). The median value 
was significantly lower in RSM (P=0.011) than in Cont after 
Boston lettuce cultivation in Ibaraki soil (Fig. 5D).
Relationship between the growth degrees of F. oxysporum 
and disease incidence of plants
The relationship between the disease incidence of plants 
and growth degrees of F. oxysporum in Aichi and Ibaraki 
soils is shown in Fig. 6 (spinach, F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae) 
and 7 (Boston lettuce, F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae), respectively. 
Positive correlations were found between the disease inci-
dence of spinach and growth degree of F. oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae based on the extension length of the colonies 
before (P=0.012) and after crop cultivation (P=0.011) (Fig. 
6). A correlation was not observed between the disease inci-
dence of Boston lettuce and growth degree of F. oxysporum f. 
sp. lactucae (P=0.556 [before crop cultivation] and P=0.467 
[after crop cultivation], Fig. 7).
Discussion
Decreases in the disease incidence of plants indicated that 
CRC, FYM, RSM, and FM soils expressed suppressiveness 
against spinach wilt disease, while FYM and RSM soils 
expressed suppressiveness against lettuce root rot disease 
(Fig. 1 and S2). Since suppressiveness against soil-borne diseases 
may be developed by the application of organic amendments 
(6), the long-term application of organic amendments in 
fields may have contributed to the suppressiveness of soils. 
Before crop cultivation, the growth of F. oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae and F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae was suppressed 
more in CRC than in NF as well as in RSM than in Cont (Fig. 
2 and 3). These results suggest that the co-cultivation method 
Fig.  5.  Growth degree of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
lactucae based on an estimation of the extension length of 
the colony for the cultivation of Boston lettuce in Aichi 
(A, B) and Ibaraki (C, D) soils. Values show the mean of 
medians at dilutions from 10–1 to 10–6 with SE before (A, 
C) (n=3) and after crop cultivation (B, D) (n=3). NF, 
unfertilized; CF, chemical fertilizer; CF+FYM, chemical 
fertilizer and 40 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard manure; CRC, chemical 
fertilizers and 40 t ha–1 y–1 coffee residue compost; FYM, 
400 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard manure; Cont, compound inorganic 
fertilizers; RSM, 940–4,700 kg ha–1 rapeseed meal; FM, 
710–3,600 kg ha–1 fish meal; SBM, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1 
steamed bone meal; Mix, 930–4,600 kg ha–1 mixture of 
rapeseed meal, fish meal, and steamed bone meal. * and 
** indicate significant differences from NF or Cont at 
P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively.
Fig.  4.  Growth degree of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
spinaciae based on an estimation of the extension length 
of the colony for the cultivation of spinach in Aichi (A, B) 
and Ibaraki (C, D) soils. Values show the mean of medians 
at dilutions from 10–1 to 10–6 with SE before (A, C) (n=3) 
and after crop cultivation (B, D) (n=4). NF, unfertilized; 
CF, chemical fertilizer; CF+FYM, chemical fertilizer and 
40 t ha–1 y–1 farmyard manure; CRC, chemical fertilizer and 
40 t ha–1 y–1 coffee residue compost; FYM, 400 t ha–1 y–1 
farmyard manure; Cont, compound inorganic fertilizers; RSM, 
940–4,700 kg ha–1 rapeseed meal; FM, 710–3,600 kg ha–1 
fish meal; SBM, 1,300–6,300 kg ha–1 steamed bone meal; 
Mix, 930–4,600 kg ha–1 mixture of rapeseed meal, fish 
meal, and steamed bone meal. * indicates a significant 
difference from NF or Cont at P<0.05.

Suppressiveness of Soil against Fusarium
63
has the capacity to evaluate suppressiveness against soil-borne 
diseases of soils before crop cultivation in fields with the 
long-term application of organic amendments.
A positive correlation was observed between the disease 
incidence of spinach and growth degree of F. oxysporum f. 
sp. spinaciae (Fig. 6), as reported in the pot experiment (12). 
When the co-cultivation method is used to diagnose soil 
suppressiveness against Fusarium diseases, it will be necessary 
to reveal the relationship between the growth suppression 
degree of pathogenic Fusarium strains by the co-cultivation 
method and the disease incidence of crops. The disease inci-
dence of spinach was low when the growth degree was less 
than approximately 5 mm (Fig. 6), indicating that a growth 
degree of 5 mm may be an index for a diagnosis. However, 
caution is needed regarding an outlier observed in CF (Fig. 
6B); despite the high incidence of 4, the growth degree of F. 
oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae was 0 mm. On the 104-fold dilu-
tion plate, the colony of F. oxysporum was covered with the 
lawn of a fungus and the growth of F. oxysporum was inhibited, 
resulting in an extension length of the colony of 0 mm. Thus, 
care is needed in this case because the growth degree of F. 
oxysporum estimated by the co-cultivation method may be 
affected and, thus, does not correspond to the disease incidence 
of plants. Further investigations of the relationship between 
the growth degree of pathogenic Fusarium strains estimated 
by the co-cultivation method and the disease incidence of 
plants are needed before the application of the co-cultivation 
method for practical use.
A correlation was not observed between the disease inci-
dence of Boston lettuce and growth degree of F. oxysporum f. 
sp. lactucae (Fig. 7), indicating that the co-cultivation method 
is not useful for evaluating soil suppressiveness against lettuce 
root rot disease. However, RSM showed the growth suppression 
of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae by the co-cultivation method 
and disease incidence was reduced in RSM (Fig. 1D, 3D, and 
5D). The disease incidence of Boston lettuce was mostly 3 or 
4 and this may have affected the evaluation of the growth 
degree by the method and resulted in no relationship between 
the disease incidence and degree of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae. 
The difference observed in the degree of suppressiveness 
between spinach and Boston lettuce observed in CRC (Fig. 1) 
may have indicated that the fungistatic capability of these 
soils was less effective for F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae than 
for F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae. There are very diverse 
pathogenic types (Formae speciales) of F. oxysporum (4) and 
differences in their infectivities may have contributed to this 
difference. In addition, lettuce root rot disease showed symp-
toms with a low density of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae in soil 
(13). Therefore, it was not possible to evaluate suppressive-
ness using the co-cultivation method; however, the growth 
degree of Fusarium was assessed using this method.
Disease suppression for spinach wilt was not shown in the 
sterilized soil of CRC, indicating that biotic factors were 
involved in the suppressiveness of CRC. The population 
density of fungi in CRC was two orders of magnitude higher 
than that in other plots and the fungal community structure 
may be one of the factors related to the suppressiveness of 
CRC for spinach wilt disease; however, suppressiveness was 
not observed for lettuce root rot disease. Adams et al. (1) 
reported that spent coffee grounds reduced the population 
density of F. solani f. sp. phaseoli. Hamanaka et al. (9) also 
showed suppressiveness against crown and root rot of tomato 
caused by F. oxysporum f. sp. radices-lycopersici in CRC 
soil. They demonstrated that fungi were predominant in the 
microbial community and suggested that fungal members 
close to F. oxysporum were responsible for this suppressiveness. 
Fig.  7.  Correlation between the disease incidence of 
Boston lettuce by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lactucae in 
each plant and the mean of median values of growth 
degrees of F. oxysporum f. sp. lactucae with SE (A) on an 
estimation of the extension length of the colony (n=30) 
before (A) and after crop cultivation (B).
Fig.  6.  Correlation between the disease incidence of 
spinach by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae in each 
plant and the mean of median values of growth degrees of 
F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae with SE (A) on an estimation 
of the extension length of the colony (n=40) before (A) 
and after crop cultivation (B). * indicates a significant 
difference at P<0.05.

Mitsuboshi et al.
64
Fungi related to Fusarium in soil may also have been involved 
in the suppression of F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae on plates 
of up to 10–4-fold dilutions because the population density of 
Fusarium spp. was estimated to be approximately 104 cfu g–1 
in CRC soil (data not shown).
Suppressiveness against spinach wilt disease was observed 
in the sterilized soil of RSM, indicating that abiotic factors 
are involved in the suppressiveness of RSM. Ueda et al. (16) 
reported that composted rapeseed meal exhibited lytic activity 
against F. oxysporum f. sp. cucumerium and reduced the 
population density of F. oxysporum in soil. Zakaria et al. (18) 
found that volatile inhibitory substances including ammonia 
were involved in the reduction of F. oxysporum and F. solani 
in soils treated with oilseed (linseed, cottonseed, and soybean) 
meals. Some of the substances involved in suppressiveness 
produced during the decomposition process of rapeseed meal 
may have been heat-stable, whereas substances such as 
ammonia were degraded or removed from soil by autoclaving. 
In addition, suppression of the growth of F. oxysporum was 
observed using the Fusarium co-cultivation method in RSM 
(Fig. 4C and D), indicating that biotic factors were also involved 
in suppressiveness in RSM. Members of Actinobacteria were 
previously suggested to play a key role as microbial defenders 
in suppressive soil against Fusarium wilt of strawberry caused 
by F. oxysporum f. sp. fragariae (7). The population density 
of actinomycetes was higher in RSM than in Cont (Table 1). 
We observed higher number of colonies of actinomycetes on 
the 10–5-fold dilution plates for RSM than on the plates for 
other plots, indicating that the suppression of Fusarium is 
related to actinomycetes.
Although FYM exhibited suppressiveness against spinach 
wilt and lettuce root rot diseases (Fig. 1A and B), the 
co-cultivation method showed no effect on the suppression of 
the growth of F. oxysporum f. sp. spinaciae (Fig. 2A and 4A). 
Abiotic factors may have been involved in this suppressive-
ness because the sterilized soil of FYM still showed suppres-
siveness in spinach. Ueda et al. (17) reported that sterols 
extracted from bark compost that were not degraded by 
autoclaving may have functioned as defensive substances 
against pathogenic fungi. These substances may contribute to 
the suppressiveness of FYM soil on plates at low dilutions by 
the co-cultivation method. Toyota and Kimura (14) found 
that bacterial strains attached to the chlamydospores of F. 
oxysporum f. sp. raphani and lysed them, but did not inhibit 
mycelial growth. In this case, a biotic factor was responsible 
for suppressiveness; however, it was not possible to evaluate 
suppressiveness using the co-cultivation method.
The co-cultivation method has some limitations, i.e. it cannot 
be applied when the cause of suppressiveness is abiotic. In 
addition, the degree of suppression achieved with the combi-
nation of a pathogenic strain of F. oxysporum and a crop 
cannot be extrapolated to other combinations of diseases and 
crops; the pathogenic strain of F. oxysporum responsible for 
each combination of disease and crop needs to be used. 
However, a merit is that a quick and easy estimation of soil 
suppressiveness is possible by using common equipment only 
such as an autoclave and a clean bench within 10 d. Therefore, 
the co-cultivation method may be useful for predicting and 
diagnosing suppressiveness against soil-borne diseases.
Conclusions
We applied the co-cultivation method of F. oxysporum and 
soil microorganisms to soil that exhibited suppressiveness 
against soil-borne diseases due to the long-term application 
of organic amendments. A correlation was found between the 
disease incidence of spinach and growth degree of F. oxysporum 
f. sp. spinaciae, indicating that it is possible to evaluate sup-
pressiveness against spinach wilt disease by the co-cultivation 
method. However, there were some exceptions where soil 
showed a low disease incidence, but the growth of F. oxysporum 
was not suppressed on agar plates, suggesting the limitations 
of this method in its applicability. Further investigations are 
needed to elucidate the relationship between suppressiveness 
and the biological and chemical properties of soil in addition 
to the growth degree of F. oxysporum in order to comprehen-
sively predict and diagnose suppressiveness.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Professor Akira Watanabe and Associate 
Professors Jun Murase and Takeshi Watanabe of the Graduate 
School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University for their 
valuable comments in conducting this study.
References
1.	 Adams, P.B., J.A. Lewis, and G.C. Papavizas. 1968. Survival of 
root-infecting fungi in soil. IX. Mechanism of control of Fusarium 
root rot of bean with spent coffee grounds. Phytopathology 58:1603–
1608.
2.	 Anonymous. 1975. Appendix, I. Composition of medium and preparation 
method, p. 431–443. In Soil Microbiological Society of Japan (ed.), 
Experimental Methods in Soil Microbiology. Yokendo, Tokyo (In 
Japanese).
3.	 Anonymous. 1992. Appendix, I. Composition of medium and preparation 
method, p. 379–397. In Soil Microbiological Society of Japan (ed.), 
Experimental Methods in Soil Microbiology, New Edition. Yokendo, 
Tokyo (In Japanese).
4.	 Aoki, T. 2001. Taxonomy of the genus Fusarium and related ascomy-
cetes. Jpn. J. Phytopathol. 67:235–247 (In Japanese).
5.	 Baum, C., B. Eichler-Löbermann, and K. Hrynkiewicz. 2015. Chapter 
16, Impact of organic amendments on the suppression of Fusarium 
wilt, p. 353–362. In M.K. Meghvansi and A. Varma (eds.), Organic 
Amendments and Soil Suppressiveness in Plant Disease Management. 
Springer, New York.
6.	 Bonanomi, G., V. Antignani, M. Capodilupo, and F. Scala. 2010. 
Identifying the characteristics of organic soil amendments that sup-
press soilborne plant diseases. Soil Biol. Biochem. 42:136–144.
7.	 Cha, J.Y., S. Han, H.J. Hong, et al. 2016. Microbial and biochemical 
basis of a Fusarium wilt-suppressive soil. ISME J. 10:119–129.
8.	 Escuadra, G.M.E., and Y. Amemiya. 2008. Suppression of Fusarium 
wilt of spinach with compost amendments. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 
74:267–274.
9.	 Hamanaka, Y., K. Toyota, and K. Hayashi-Ikeda. 2005. Screening of 
fungal strains responsible for strong fungistasis against Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici in a coffee compost-amended 
soil. Jpn. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 76:817–824. (In Japanese with an 
English summary).
10.	 Huang, X., T. Wen, J. Zhang, L. Meng, T. Zhu, and Z. Cai. 2015. 
Toxic organic acids produced in biological soil disinfestation mainly 
caused the suppression of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense. BioControl 
60:113–124.
11.	 Komada, H. 1983. Biological control of soil-borne diseases, its 
aspects and problems. Kantou Tousan Byougaichuu Kenkyuukaihou 
30:1–9 (In Japanese).

Suppressiveness of Soil against Fusarium
65
12.	 Mitsuboshi, M., Y. Kioka, K. Noguchi, and S. Asakawa. 2016. An 
evaluation method for the suppression of pathogenic Fusarium 
oxysporum by soil microorganisms using the dilution plate technique. 
Microbes Environ. 31:307–313.
13.	 Nishimura, N. 1998. Identification of root rot pathogen of head lettuce 
on selective media and the density in plastic film house soils. Kyusyu 
Agric. Res. 60:75 (In Japanese).
14.	 Toyota, K., and M. Kimura. 1993. Colonization of chlamydospores of 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. raphani by soil bacteria and their effects 
on germination. Soil Biol. Biochem. 25:193–197.
15.	 Toyota, K., K. Yamamoto, and M. Kimura. 1994. Mechanisms of 
suppression of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. raphani in soils so-called 
suppressive to Fusarium-wilt of radish. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 40:373–
380.
16.	 Ueda, K., M. Kobayashi, E. Takahashi, and M. Oshima. 1980. Effect 
of organic soil amendments on control of Fusarium wilt disease and 
population density of the pathogen in the soil. J. Sci. Soil Manure 
Japan 51:369–373 (In Japanese).
17.	 Ueda, T., H. Kai, and E. Taniguchi. 1990. Growth inhibition of 
soil-borne pathogenic fungi by typical sterols. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
22:987–991.
18.	 Zakaria, M.A., J.L. Lockwood, and A.B. Filonow. 1980. Reduction in 
Fusarium population density in soil by volatile degradation products 
of oilseed meal amendments. Phytopathology 70:495–499.
