INTRODUCTION
Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is recognized as a constellation
of risk factors which can predispose an individual to the
development of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and type 2
diabetes (T2DM). These factors include central obesity,
hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, low HDL levels, and
abnormal glucose metabolism. Worldwide, 18 million people die
each year from CVD with the major predisposing factors being
hypertension and diabetes (1). Obesity, often coexisting with
T2DM, has reached pandemic proportions. The International
Obesity Task Force and WHO estimate that about 1.7 billion
people globally could be categorized as overweight or obese (1).
This upsurge in obesity is also closely associated with the
growing prevalence of diabetes, which is quickly developing
into a major burden on healthcare systems around the world.
The International Diabetes Federation estimated that there were
415 million people living with diabetes in 2015, with an
expected rise to 642 million by the year 2040 (2). Moreover,
about 200 million people globally have impaired glucose
tolerance, and this number is expected to rise to 420 million by
the year 2025 (1).
Impaired insulin-mediated glucose uptake is the principal
abnormality that bridges the metabolic and hemodynamic
disturbances found in MetS (3, 4). This state of insulin resistance
is associated with prediabetes, which is considered to be a high-
risk state for conversion to diabetes. In prediabetes, an individual
has an elevated plasma glucose level above the normal range,
but below the threshold of clinical diabetes.
Total body glucose disposal is diminished in patients with
T2DM, with over 80% of this impairment attributed to muscle
insulin resistance (5). In insulin resistant nondiabetic patients,
normoglycemia is maintained as long as pancreatic beta-cells are
able to increase their production of insulin. Over time, these
conditions lead to disease progression. Impaired beta-cell
function along with insulin resistance can appear years before
the development of diabetes and is already present in the
majority of prediabetic patients (6).
Insulin resistance can lead to a myriad of changes, such as
increased systemic blood pressure, elevated triglyceride levels,
and lowered HDL levels, which are risk factors for
macrovascular dysfunction. Furthermore, microangiopathic
changes due to increased oxidative stress and inflammation are
already present in prediabetic states (7). Thus, proper treatment
of hyperglycemia is crucial, not only for delaying onset of
diabetes but also for prevention of cardiovascular complications.
Although many pathologies are associated with diabetes, most
diseases that lead to morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients
stem from cardiovascular complications (8). Significant progress
has been made in understanding links between metabolism,
JOURNAL OF PHYSIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY 2019, 70, 6, 809-824
www.jpp.krakow.pl | DOI: 10.26402/jpp.2019.6.01
Review article
K. LUC1, A. SCHRAMM-LUC1, T.J. GUZIK1,2, T.P. MIKOLAJCZYK1,3
OXIDATIVE STRESS AND INFLAMMATORY MARKERS 
IN PREDIABETES AND DIABETES
1Department of Internal and Agricultural Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow, Poland;
2Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 
3Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Prediabetes is a state of elevated plasma glucose in which the threshold for diabetes has not yet been reached and can
predispose to the development of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Insulin resistance and impaired beta-cell
function are often already present in prediabetes. Hyperglycemia can upregulate markers of chronic inflammation and
contribute to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, which ultimately cause vascular dysfunction.
Conversely, increased oxidative stress and inflammation can lead to insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion.
Proper treatment of hyperglycemia and inhibition of ROS overproduction is crucial for delaying onset of diabetes and
for prevention of cardiovascular complications. Thus, it is imperative to determine the mechanisms involved in the
progression from prediabetes to diabetes including a clarification of how old and new medications affect oxidative and
immune mechanisms of diabetes. In this review, we discuss the relationship between oxidative stress and hyperglycemia
along with links between inflammation and prediabetes. Additionally, the effects of hyperglycemic memory,
microvesicles, micro-RNA, and epigenetic regulation on inflammation, oxidative state, and glycemic control are
highlighted. Adipose tissue and their influence on chronic inflammation are also briefly reviewed. Finally, the role of
immune-targeted therapies and anti-diabetic medication on glycemic control and oxidative stress are discussed.
K ey w ords : prediabetes, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, hyperglycemia, reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, adipose
tissue, inflammation, anti-diabetic drugs

immunity and development of cardiovascular pathology in
diabetes (7). This includes a better understanding of sex-specific
changes in both cardiac and vascular metabolic damage (9, 10),
and also a clearer understanding of how old and new
medications affect oxidative and immune mechanisms of
diabetes. This review will focus on these mechanisms.
THE LINK BETWEEN OXIDATIVE STRESS
AND HYPERGLYCEMIA
Hyperglycemia in prediabetes can lead to oxidative stress
and the upregulation of proinflammatory factors, which
ultimately lead to vascular dysfunction (Fig. 1). To prevent the
development of comorbidities, it is imperative to determine the
mechanisms involved in the progression from prediabetes to
diabetes. Oxidative stress leads to impaired glucose uptake in
muscle and fat cells and decreases insulin secretion from beta-
cells (11, 12). Reduction of systemic oxidative stress through the
use of an nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH) oxidase inhibitor improved glucose metabolism in a
mouse model (13).
Data from the Framingham Offspring Study showed a
positive association between the prevalence of insulin
resistance and concentration of an oxidative stress marker,
urinary 8-epi-prostaglandin F2α (8-epi-PGF2a) (14). This
demonstrates that insulin resistance is associated with oxidative
stress in non-diabetics and subgroups with an elevated risk of
diabetes such as obesity or impaired fasting glucose (IFG).
Moreover, in subjects with IFG, this association was higher
when compared to subjects with normal fasting glucose (NFG).
This is in line with previous studies correlating 8-epi-PGF2a
with increased insulin resistance and impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT) in humans (15, 16) and with previous in vitro and rodent
model data (17).
Focus on oxidative and inflammatory genes is supported by
whole gene expression profiling of epicardial adipose tissue
from patients with coronary artery disease. Genes involved in
oxidative and lipid metabolism, mitochondrial function, nuclear
receptor 
transcriptional 
activity, 
antigen 
presentation,
chemokine signaling, and inflammation are altered in
cardiovascular disease (18). Thus, their associations to key risk
factors such as diabetes need to be better established.
Succinobucol is an antioxidant which is a potential oral
antidiabetic agent, as it was shown to have antihyperglycemic
activity in preclinical studies. In phase II trials it was demonstrated
to have anti-inflammatory properties and positive effects on
coronary atherosclerosis (19, 20). While most studies have focused
810
ROS
Insulin resistance
Lipid 
peroxidation
Impaired 
insulin 
secretion
RAGE 
[62]
Obesity / 
increased 
amount of 
VAT
Apocyanin [35]
Increased eNOS 
phosphorylation at 
ser 633 [45]
eNOS
MitoTEMPO 
treatment or BH4
rescue [28]
PIM1 [45]
BH4 oxidation/decreased 
eNOS phosphorylation at 
ser 1177 [28]
Upregulation of 
SOD activity
Increased FMD 
and myocardial 
protection
NO
NADPH 
Oxidase
BPIFB4 [46]
LOX-1 
upregulation 
[35]
[35]
oxLDL binding to 
LOX-1 [60]
NF-KB 
activation 
[60]
Xanthene 
Oxidase
Adiponectin  
[75, 84]
CRP, IL-6, IL-18, TNF-α
[62, 71, 90]
Omentin-1
Uncoupled/dysfunctional 
eNOS
Insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake
PPAR-γ
[85,86]
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines ie. TGF-β, 
IL-10 [7, 54, 103]
M2-like phenotype 
macrophages, T-reg 
cells, Th2 cells
Elastase [106]
Neutrophils
p66Shc
PKC-βII 
[110], 
Epigenetic 
regulation 
[109]
Disturbed 
expression of 
miRNAs [112]
AGE-induced vascular 
damage, decreased 
angiogenesis
Inflammation
Hyperglycemia
TNF-α
[87-89]
DAG, PKC, AGEs
[62]
Diabetic vascular disease
[112]
GLUT4 
modulation and 
phosphorylation 
of IRS-1 [97]
Free Fatty 
Acids
[54]
Fig. 1. Major interactions between oxidative stress, inflammation, hyperglycemia, and insulin-resistance. ROS play a central role in
the interactions involving inflammation, oxidative stress, and metabolic control. Hyperglycemia, through various mechanisms, leads
to increased ROS production and chronic inflammation. Perturbed expression of miRNAs and epigenetic regulation of oxidative stress
genes are contributory factors to hyperglycemic memory. Sources of ROS include NADPH oxidase, dysfunctional eNOS, and
xanthene oxidase. Excessive production of ROS can feedback and contribute to the pathogenesis of insulin-resistance and impaired
insulin secretion. Adipokines such as adiponectin and omentin-1 can influence insulin-resistance through various pathways.

on macroangiopathy, a better understanding microcirculatory
dysfunction in cardiovascular pathology (21) is needed in
metabolic diseases including obesity and diabetes (22, 23).
Sources of reactive oxygen species in prediabetes
1. Mitochondrial oxidation
Mitochondrial respiration is the major cellular source of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and this production is balanced
by clearance through antioxidant systems (superoxide dismutase
(SOD), glutathione peroxidase, catalase, etc). In hyperglycemic
states such as prediabetes and diabetes, ROS can accumulate and
lead to non-specific oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, and
other molecules (24). Hyperglycemia also leads to increased
ROS production through activation of the kinase C (PKC)
pathway via diacylglycerol (DAG), increased hexosamine
pathway flux, increased advanced glycation end (AGE)
production, and increased flux in the polyol pathway (24). Atf3,
an immediate response gene to metabolic and oxidative insults,
has been recently identified as an important protective regulator
of many of these changes (25).
Mitochondrial oxidative stress is associated with insulin
resistance, T2DM, and its complications (17, 26, 27). To
examine the effects of a mitochondrial-targeted antioxidant,
MitoTEMPO, on markers of oxidative stress, glucose tolerance,
and insulin resistance, one study used a high-fat diet (HFD)
mouse model (28). Increased acetylation of manganese
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), the main scavenging enzyme
in mitochondria, which reduces its activity (29), was observed in
the HFD group. Furthermore, markers of mitochondrial
oxidative stress and cellular oxidation were elevated in HFD
mice (28). Following MitoTEMPO treatment, mitochondrial-
induced oxidative stress was reduced. In addition, MitoTEMPO-
treated HFD mice had significantly reduced serum glucose and
six-hour fasting insulin levels compared with untreated HFD-
mice (28). This demonstrated that reduction of mitochondrial
oxidative stress leads to improved glucose tolerance and insulin
resistance in a mouse model of MetS. Finally, mitochondrial
oxidation is closely interlinked with other sources of oxidative
stress such as NADPH oxidases (30).
2. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidases
Exposure to hyperglycemia is known to increase
intracellular ROS generation, which leads to vascular
inflammation, 
leukocyte 
adhesion, 
insulin 
resistance,
protein/macromolecule glycation, and inhibition of NO
synthesis. Intracellular superoxide production is increased from
various sources such as NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase,
cyclooxygenase, and uncoupled eNOS (31, 32). Although there
are many sources of ROS, NADPH oxidases appear to have a
central role their generation. Found in almost all mammalian
cells, their physiological role is to produce ROS for functions of
innate immunity, redox-signaling cascades, and for the
production of certain hormones (33). Dysfunction of NADPH
oxidase can lead to dysregulation of other oxidases, leading to
increased ROS production (34). Because of their overarching
role in ROS generation, this makes NADPH oxidases an
attractive target for future therapeutic strategies in the treatment
of CVDs.
Upon exposure of human umbilical artery endothelial cells
(HUAECs) to hyperglycemia, increased expression of NADPH
oxidase subunits Nox2 and p47phox was observed (35). NOS3,
NOX1, NOX4, and CYBA gene (codes for p22-phox subunit)
expression was upregulated by hyperglycemia in human
microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC), but not in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) (36). This shows that
elevated glucose can induce different responses in NOS and
NOX in different cell types.
Treatment of obese mice with apocynin, an NADPH oxidase
inhibitor, reduced lipid peroxidation and H2O2 generation in
white adipose tissue (WAT) (13). Additionally, plasma levels of
adiponectin increased, while plasma glucose, insulin, and
triglyceride levels were all significantly reduced. This is clear
demonstration that inhibition of NADPH oxidase leads to
reduced lipid peroxidation, ROS synthesis, oxidative stress in
WAT, and improved glucose/lipid metabolism (13). This is in
agreement with older studies which showed that oxidative stress
impairs insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells and glucose
uptake in muscle and adipose tissue (11, 12). Thus, reduction of
oxidative stress can lead to improved glucose metabolism.
3. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is an enzyme
which has cardioprotective properties, mainly through its
production of nitric oxide (NO) in the vascular endothelium.
Although NO is known mostly for its role in regulating vascular
tone, it also possesses antioxidant activity through its
upregulation of superoxide dismutase (SOD) (37). In certain
disease states, oxidation of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) occurs, a
cofactor for eNOS, which leads to eNOS uncoupling. In these
situations, dysregulated eNOS contributes to increased oxidative
stress through the generation ROS instead of NO (34, 38, 39).
Exposure of HUAECs to hyperglycemia attenuated eNOS
activity and total nitrate levels (35).
It is also known that eNOS exerts important protective
effects on the myocardium (40). Thus, dysfunctional eNOS will
promote diabetic cardiomyopathy, and this association is a
hallmark of myocardial dysfunction in diabetes (41).
Hyperglycemic mice induced through the use of a high-fat diet
(HFD) had increased mitochondrial superoxide and cardiac
levels of H2O2 (28). Upon treatment with MitoTEMPO and BH4,
these were reversed. This indicates that mitochondria and
uncoupled eNOS are the major sources of ROS in a MetS mouse
model. In addition, decreased eNOS phosphorylation at Ser-
1177, which diminishes its activity, was seen in HFD-mice (28).
This suggests that eNOS activity is itself downregulated in
hyperglycemic conditions. Hyperglycemia also significantly
blunted the flow-mediated dilation response to endogenous NO
stimulation (42). This effect was reversed in hyperinsulinemia or
by an exogenous NO donor (nitroglycerin administration),
showing that hyperglycemia acts through an endogenous NO
mechanism to impair endothelial function (42).
Several new aspects of eNOS regulation have recently been
uncovered. This includes epigenetic regulation (43, 44) and
novel regulatory functions of serine threonine kinases. Pim1 is a
serine/threonine kinase acting upstream of eNOS to
phosphorylate it at Ser-633, thereby increasing its activity and
production of NO (45). Exposing cultured HUVECs to
hyperglycemia decreased eNOS activity and NO production
through the impairment of Pim1 expression (45). Pim1 could
prove to be another therapeutic target in the treatment of diabetic
vascular complications in the future. Because of this, it would be
valuable to determine if upregulation of Pim1 can improve
endothelial function through anti-oxidative effects in prediabetic
or diabetic subjects. Bactericidal/permeability-increasing fold-
containing-family-B-member-4 (BPIFB4) is another interesting
molecule which may be important in prediabetes and diabetes
and has recently been shown to upregulate eNOS function
through Ca2+
mobilization and PKCa
activation (46).
Additionally, when eNOS was inhibited, BPIFB4 still enhanced
endothelial activity via an EDHF-mediated pathway.
811

Biomarkers of oxidative stress in prediabetes
Previously, oxidative stress was thought to be a simple
imbalance between the synthesis and scavenging of ROS. This is
not entirely the case, as the current understanding is that
increased oxidative stress also involves the dysfunction of ROS-
producing enzymes (34). Moreover, many clinical trials using
scavenger antioxidants have failed to demonstrate benefits in
human subjects, even though studies using animal and in vitro
models have shown an improvement in endothelial function.
Increased oxidative stress has a central role in the pathogenesis
of many diseases such as atherosclerosis, vascular inflammation,
and endothelial dysfunction and is thought to play a role in the
progression of prediabetes to diabetes (8). Thus, it is important
to detect changes in oxidative stress early enough to prevent
disease progression.
The role of oxidative stress and its relationship to endothelial
dysfunction in diabetes has been widely studied (47-51).
Moreover, 
there 
are 
already 
detectable 
features 
of
hyperglycemia-associated complications and changes in general
redox-status and inflammatory state even before diabetes is
diagnosed. Consequently, recent efforts have focused on the role
of oxidative stress and inflammation in prediabetes (13, 14, 28,
36, 42, 52). Evidence shows that obesity, especially that
involving visceral adipose tissue (VAT), has a major role in
contributing to systemic oxidative stress and inflammation in
humans, and these can lead to insulin resistance (17, 53, 54).
1. Glutathione
Antioxidant markers could be useful in prediabetes
screening. One such marker, glutathione, can exist in two forms,
reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG). The reduced form,
Glutathione (GSH), is an antioxidant and the main scavenger of
free radicals in RBCs, which helps prevent cellular damage by
neutralizing ROS. It acts by donating a reducing equivalent, such
as H+ + e–, to other molecules such as ROS. In the process, GSH
is oxidized into glutathione disulfide (GSSG). A commonly used
marker of increased oxidative stress is the GSH/GSSG ratio
(55). Subjects with prediabetes had a significantly decreased
GSH/GSSG ratio in comparison to controls, which indicates that
an impaired redox status is already present and detectable before
clinical manifestations of diabetes appear (56).
2. 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine
Levels of GSH are dependent on diabetes progression (52).
Although erythrocyte GSH levels were similar in IFG and
normoglycemic subjects, serum levels of 8-hydroxy-2’-
deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), a biomarker for oxidative DNA
damage and endothelial dysfunction, were significantly higher in
the IFG group (52). Furthermore, a significant positive
correlation was seen between serum 8-OHdG and the
atherogenic index of plasma, which indicates a relationship
between atherosclerotic risk and oxidative stress. Preclinical
atherosclerosis was associated with increased 8-OHdG in
subjects with IFG, even though these subjects had normal
cholesterol and no significant lipid peroxidation (52).
3. Lectin-like oxLDL receptor
Lectin-like oxLDL receptor (LOX-1) is a receptor for
oxidized LDL found mainly on endothelial cells, however, it is
also seen on vascular smooth muscle cells and macrophages (57,
58). Normally, LOX-1 is expressed at low levels in healthy
adults. Its upregulation in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis as
well as diabetes has already been documented (47, 57, 59).
Upregulation of LOX-1 signaling pathways is involved in
vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and foam cell
formation when taken up by macrophages. Upon binding of
oxidized LDL to LOX-1, multiple downstream events are
activated, including activation of membrane-bound NADPH
oxidase, and activation of the NF-kB pathway (60). In cultured
HUAECs, it was observed that high glucose increased LOX-1
mRNA levels, accompanied by an augmented uptake of oxLDL
(35). Apocynin, an inhibitor of NADPH oxidase, reversed these
effects, demonstrating its antioxidant and cardioprotective
properties.
Advanced glycation end-products
Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) are proteins or
lipids which are formed through non-enzymatic glycation as a
result of being exposed to hyperglycemic conditions. They are
believed to have an important role in cardiovascular
complications in diabetes (61). AGEs bind to and activate RAGE
(receptor for AGE), which then initiates a proinflammatory
response. This acts via heterodimerization with TLR-4, which
stimulates the production of pro-IL-1B, pro-IL-18, and NLRP-3
(62). In this context, soluble RAGE has been postulated as a
valuable biomarker of these molecular events (63). Although
initially described in pulmonary hypertension, future studies
involving soluble RAGE in diabetes and prediabetes will
identify further links to inflammatory and oxidative stress
mechanisms in humans (63).
Reactive oxygen species neutralizers and others
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor-2 (Nrf2) is a
transcription factor which acts as the main regulator of the
antioxidant response. Nrf2 levels are normally low and the
protein is kept in the cytoplasm. During periods of oxidative
stress, Nrf2 translocates into the nucleus (64). Through
activation of this signaling pathway, expression of genes
involved in the removal of ROS contributes to the cellular
defense against oxidative stress. Nrf2 activation also regulates
genes that have a role in the immune and inflammatory
responses. In mouse models, Nrf2 activation protected
pancreatic beta-cells from damage, prevented diabetic
development, and increased insulin sensitivity (65, 66).
Nrf2 levels from nuclear extracts of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were lower in prediabetic and
diabetic patients (67). This is interesting, as the reverse is
expected, since oxidative stress in diabetic patients should
enhance Nrf2 levels. These findings indicate that the Nrf2
response in prediabetic and diabetic subjects is impaired. In
diabetic patients, total antioxidant status and GSH levels were
lower, while increased lipid peroxidation and SOD activity were
observed (67). Hence, the low levels of Nrf2 seen in prediabetic
and diabetic patients lead to oxidative stress and redox status
imbalance. In the future, Nrf2 could emerge as a potential target
for therapy in the prevention of further complications due to
oxidative stress in prediabetic patients.
In HMVECs exposed to hyperglycemia, there was an overall
upregulation of ROS-neutralizing and peroxide-clearance
enzymes such as SOD1, glutathione peroxidase-1, thioredoxin
reductase-1 and 2 (36). Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is a protein
that uncouples the electron transport chain from oxidative
phosphorylation, which leads to decreased ROS generation in
mitochondria. Gene expression of both UCP1 and NFE2L2
(which encodes for Nrf2) were upregulated in HMVEC in
response to hyperglycemia (36). In HUVEC, levels of these
enzymes either stayed the same or were downregulated.
Superoxide production increased in HUVEC and HMVEC, but
812

H2O2 levels increased only in HUVEC in response to
hyperglycemia. This demonstrates a differential change in gene
expression profiles, and superoxide and H2O2 levels between
different endothelial cell types during hyperglycemia.
INFLAMMATION IN PREDIABETES
Inflammation is an essential player in both endothelial and
cardiac pathology in prediabetes and diabetes. In the vessels,
endothelial signaling regulates recruitment of leukocytes (68)
and this mechanism is also important for metabolic
cardiomyopathy, while smooth muscle cells play a role in more
chronic 
stages 
of 
vascular 
remodeling 
and
calcification/stiffening (69, 70). In diabetic or obese patients,
there is chronic low-grade inflammation which is reflected by
high levels of cytokines such os TNF-α and other inflammatory
markers such as CRP and TNF-a (71). Furthermore, this
inflammatory state is thought to be the mechanism by which
metabolic disorders are associated with the development of CVD
and heart failure in patients with MetS (62).
The context of cardiac myocyte metabolic changes in
diabetes and prediabetes is controversial, as it has been recently
reported that cardiac metabolic adaptations in diabetic db/db
mice seem to prevent pressure overload-induced heart failure
(72). At the same time, complex metabolic changes promote
metabolic cardiomyopathy (24). Because of this, both vascular
and cardiac inflammation and its role in the development of
prediabetes is currently a topic of interest. Various pro- and anti-
inflammatory markers have been associated with the progression
of prediabetes to diabetes, a few of which include adiponectin,
extracellular newly identified-RAGE (EN-RAGE), IL-6, IL-13,
CRP, IL-18, IL-1 receptor antagonist, and neopterin (73).
Moreover, lipid-responsive/specific CD1d restricted immune
cells (74), which play an important role in atherosclerosis, are
gaining significant attention in diabetes as part of the
immunometabolic network (7).
Adipose tissue and free fatty acids
White adipose tissue (WAT) is used mainly for lipid storage
and exists as visceral adipose tissue (VAT) and subcutaneous
adipose tissue (SAT). VAT is generally more metabolically
active than SAT, containing more immune cells in normal and
pathological states. Aside from energy storage purposes, adipose
tissue can also function as an endocrine organ, being involved in
many metabolic and inflammatory responses (75). Another
factor, underappreciated so far, includes increased sympathetic
outflow in metabolic conditions. Adipose tissue is highly
innervated and this innervation is essential for regulation of its
inflammatory and adipokine releasing properties (76).
When the physiological functions of adipose tissues are
perturbed, such as in obesity, there is increased production of
proinflammatory mediators and release of free fatty acids (FFA),
which can lead to the development of metabolic disorders such as
insulin resistance (54). The mechanisms of induction of
inflammatory responses in adipose tissue have been expertly
reviewed elsewhere (77-80), however, from a hormone
metabolism point of view it is important to emphasize the role of
the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) in this process (81).
Additionally, increased levels of FFAs have been proposed as key
activators of inflammation and metabolic signaling in obesity
(82). FFAs activate TLR-4 in adipocytes and macrophages, this
leads to upregulation of NF-kB signaling and increased
expression of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-a and IL-6
(83). This suggests that inflammation of adipose tissue is the cause
of impaired insulin function and not the other way around.
1. Adiponectin
Adiponectin is considered as an anti-inflammatory
adipokine, which can inhibit TNF-a-induced activation of NF-
kB signaling and endothelial adhesion molecule expression. It
has been shown to inhibit NADPH-oxidase activity in humans,
increase 5’adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK)-mediated eNOS phosphorylation in cell culture
models, and improve eNOS coupling and NO availability in
human vasculature (75, 84). Levels of adiponectin are reduced in
hyperglycemic states and this dysregulation is thought to
contribute to increased inflammation and impaired insulin
sensitivity in prediabetic patients (62).
2. Omentin-1
Omentin-1 is another adipokine which is highly expressed in
VAT, although receptors for this protein are currently unknown.
Omentin-1 stimulates insulin-mediated glucose uptake in human
adipocytes and is negatively correlated with obesity and insulin
resistance, and this reduction of insulin resistance is thought to
act through upregulation of PPAR-g activity (85). Moreover,
omentin-1 was found to decrease NF-kB activation, production
of TNF-a and IL-6, and inhibit lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-
induced inflammation and oxLDL-induced foam cell formation
in macrophages (86). The downregulation of NF-kB signaling
also acts to shift macrophage differentiation towards the M2-like
phenotype. In a transgenic mouse model expressing the human
omentin gene in adipose tissue, there was a significant decrease
in both macrophage accumulation and mRNA expression of
proinflammatory mediators such as TNF-a, IL-6, and monocyte
chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 (87). Additionally, exposing
endothelial cells to omentin reduced TNF-a-stimulated NF-kB
activation. Interestingly, the level of circulating omentin-1
increases after treatment with metformin, or glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) analog (exenatide) through improved insulin
sensitivity (88). In the future, omentin might be a valuable
therapeutic target in the treatment of prediabetes and CVDs.
Inflammatory markers
The C5a protein acts as a potent inflammatory mediator and
is increased in a variety of inflammatory diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), inflammatory bowel disease, SLE,
and psoriasis. Importantly, C5a is involved in coagulation via the
induction of adhesion molecule expression and tissue factor
activity in endothelial cells (56). A recent study found that there
was a consistent trend of increased inflammatory markers such
as CRP, IL-6, and C5a in prediabetic patients (56). This leads to
increased coagulation activity in the prediabetic state, which
potentiates future cardiovascular complications. Furthermore,
this is in line with data from The Women’s Health Study, a
randomized clinical trial initiated in 1992, which showed that
elevated baseline plasma levels of CRP and IL-6 predict the
development of T2DM (89).
In prediabetic and diabetic patients there was clear
enhancement of the inflammatory response, as demonstrated by
the measurement of inflammatory markers such as WBC,
granulocytes, monocytes, CRP, IL-18, IL-1 receptor antagonist
(IL-1RA), and neopterin (90). As glycemic status progressed
from normoglycemic to prediabetes to T2DM, the inflammatory
and immune biomarker profile varied with this progression (90).
This is potentially useful since it allows differentiation between
early preclinical and clinical phases of the disease, its
complications, and progression.
Levels of atherogenic vascular adhesion molecules (VCAM,
ICAM, and E-selectin), pro-thrombotic factors (plasminogen
813

activator inhibitor-1 and P-selectin), and IL-6 response all
increased in acute-moderate hyperglycemia (42). This
demonstrates that there is activation of potent systemic
cytokines and increases in proinflammatory and proatherogenic
markers in non-diabetic overweight and obese subjects.
Conversely, exposure to acute-high physiological insulin levels
reversed these effects, which matches observations from a
previous study (49).
1. Cytokines in prediabetes
IL-6 is a proinflammatory cytokine produced in a number of
tissues such as activated leukocytes, endothelial cells, and
adipocytes (91, 92). It has been shown to induce hyperglycemia
and compensatory hyperinsulinemia in murine models and
humans (93, 94). Conversely, hyperglycemia can directly
stimulate upregulation of cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion
molecules, modulating various pathways which converge
towards NF-kB signaling (83). For example, expression of
high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) was upregulated in
isolated cardiomyocytes and macrophages exposed to
hyperglycemia, which led to increased activation of MAPK and
NF-kB signaling pathways and ultimately to increased TNF-a
and IL-6 secretion (95).
TNF-a is a proinflammatory cytokine which increases
insulin resistance via modulation of glucose transporter type 4
(GLUT 4) and phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1
(IRS-1) (96). TNF-a affects lipid metabolism and was previously
known as cachectin due to its significant role in the pathogenesis
of cachexia in various diseases (97). In fact, patients being treated
for psoriasis or RA with a TNF-a inhibitor often gain weight
(98). In patients suffering from psoriasis, treatment with
etanercept results in the reduction of lipid peroxidation and
oxidative stress. Moreover, an increase in plasma total
antioxidant capacity and paraoxonase-1 (PON-1) activity, an anti-
inflammatory enzyme associated with HDL, was observed during
treatment (99). Crosstalk between TNF-α-regulated pathways is
potentially both pro- and anti-inflammatory, with CKII-SIRT1-
SM22a being induced by TNF-a (100). This reinforces the
expression of SM22a, which limits the inflammatory response in
VSMCs, and has been demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro
(100).
Infiltration of adipose tissue by immune cells has an
important role in insulin resistance and prediabetes. M1-like
phenotype macrophages are considered to be proinflammatory,
while 
M2-like 
phenotype 
macrophages 
secrete 
anti-
inflammatory cytokines such as TGF-b and IL-10, which act to
decrease inflammation in adipose tissue and improve insulin
sensitivity (7). In a mouse model, macrophage infiltration of
adipose tissue was higher in mice with insulin resistance than
controls (101). It was also observed that VAT infiltration by
macrophages led to increased serum insulin levels. T regulatory
cells, considered to be anti-inflammatory, are also present in
healthy adipose tissue and recent studies suggest that they
express the insulin receptor and secrete TGF-b and IL-10 (7). In
states of insulin overload, the ability of T regulatory cells to
suppress inflammatory responses is diminished. Th2 cells in the
region also release anti-inflammatory cytokines including IL-4,
IL-5, IL-13, IL-10 (54, 102).
2. C-reactive protein
C-reactive protein (CRP) is the main downstream mediator
of the acute phase response and is derived from IL-6-dependent
hepatic biosynthesis. It is one of the most well-studied
epidemiological biomarkers of inflammation in prediabetes,
diabetes, and its associated CVDs (56, 73, 89, 103). Its major
roles include regulation of platelet activation, enhancement of
leukocyte activity, and complement fixation. CRP was found to
be strongly elevated in prediabetic compared to normoglycemic
individuals (90). However, there was only a modest increase in
CRP when comparing diabetic to prediabetic subjects. This
illustrates that even in prediabetes, early low-level inflammation
is present which is reflected by the rise in CRP levels.
3. Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen is another acute-phase protein which is heavily
involved in the systemic response to inflammation. Its actions
include contributing to blood viscosity, platelet aggregation,
modulation of coagulation activation, and enhancement of
atherosclerotic plaque progression (104). Similar to CRP, there
was a strong increase in fibrinogen when comparing prediabetic
and normoglycemic patients (90). However, diabetic subjects
had only a slight increase in fibrinogen levels when compared
with prediabetic subjects. Besides having a principal role in the
progression of CVD, fibrinogen levels strongly associated with
prediabetes independently from cardiovascular risk factors,
indicating that it could be involved in the pathogenesis of
prediabetes and diabetes (90).
Neutrophils
Neutrophils constitute more than 90% of granulocytes and
are typically involved in maintaining a chronic inflammatory
state. A study in mice showed that secreted elastase from
neutrophils, which normally has an important role during the
early stages of inflammatory responses, is involved in the
development of insulin resistance (105). Through multiple
mechanisms such as reduced insulin signaling, imbalanced lipid
metabolism, and an increase in glucose production, the secreted
neutrophil elastase led to increased cellular insulin resistance
and could have a role in the progression from normoglycemia to
prediabetes. This may be essential for vascular remodeling in the
context of neutrophil involvement (106).
Anti-inflammatory markers
Studies have shown that not only proinflammatory markers
are elevated during disease progression. IL-1RA, TGF-b1, and
GDF-15 are all anti-inflammatory proteins which are increased
in T2DM (107). IL-1RA increased more in subjects with
prediabetes than IL-18 (90). Since anti-inflammatory markers
are elevated in patients with prediabetes, it seems that this might
be an attempt by the body to counteract increased
proinflammatory activity. However, this anti-inflammatory
activity appears to be negligible, as the elevation is insufficient
to prevent disease progression to diabetes.
Epigenetics and hyperglycemic memory
Recently, studies have investigated how epigenetics can
regulate translation of ROS-generating or proinflammatory
genes in the setting of hyperglycemia (7). These investigations
are also linked to the concept of hyperglycemic memory,
whereby complications caused by hyperglycemic stress persist
even after normalization of glucose level has occurred (108). In
human endothelial cells, hyperglycemia upregulated the activity
of a mitochondrial enzyme, p66Shc, through phosphorylation by
protein kinase C-bII (PKC-bII) (109). Additionally, expression
of the p66Shc
gene was epigenetically regulated, with
overexpression 
of 
p66Shc
via
promoter 
region 
CpG
demethylation and acetylation of histone 3. These studies also
demonstrated that p66Sch-derived ROS generation sustained
814

upregulation of PKC-bII, producing a vicious cycle of persistent
mitochondrial ROS production (109, 110). Upregulated p66Shc
activity continued, even after returning the cells to
normoglycemic levels. Through the use of p66Shc siRNA gene
silencing (in addition to insulin treatment), endothelial function
was rescued by a reduction in ROS production, PKC-bII activity,
and restoration of eNOS activity (110).
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules
involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression and
are thought to have a key role in the pathogenesis of
hyperglycemia-induced cardiovascular dysfunction (111). Various
studies have shown that hyperglycemia-induced disturbances in
expression of microRNAs (such as miR-320, miR-221, miR-222,
miR-503, and miR-126) can lead to decreased angiogenesis, cause
AGE-induced vascular damage, and perturb endothelial
progenitor cell migration, all of which contribute to diabetic
vascular disease (111). Furthermore, miRNA profiling showed
that a number of miRNAs are dysregulated in diabetic mice,
participating in hyperglycemic memory and contributing to the
pathogenesis of diabetic cardiomyopathy (112). Finally, a study in
a large population-based cohort used plasma miRNA profiling to
demonstrate that certain miRNAs may serve as potential
biomarkers of T2DM (113). The role of miRNAs in metabolic and
cardiovascular dysfunction have previously been detailed
elsewhere (7, 114-117).
Microvesicles
Microvesicles (MVs), also known as microparticles, are
small particles secreted by cells, containing various molecules
such as lipids, cytokines, growth factors, microRNA, and
mitochondria (118-120). They are delivered into the plasma
from blood and endothelial cells in physiological conditions, but
also in response to inflammation, activation of coagulation, or
shear stress (118, 121). In T2DM patients, the level of
circulating microparticles increases and correlates negatively
with flow-mediated dilation, while correlating positively with
brachial ankle pulse wave velocity (122).
Endothelial microparticles, generated from human coronary
artery endothelial cells (HCAEC) which were exposed to high
glucose concentration, had increased NADPH oxidase activity
and ROS levels in comparison to microparticles delivered from
cells 
in 
normoglycemic 
conditions. 
Moreover, 
these
microparticles promoted ROS production and inflammation in
endothelial cells (31).
MVs secreted by M1-like phenotype adipose tissue
macrophages regulate NF-kB activation, which decreases
insulin signal transduction and glucose uptake in adipocytes
contributing to obesity-related insulin resistance (123).
Liraglutide, a GLP-1 analog, decreased endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced production of MVs by macrophages and reduced
atherosclerotic development in T2DM rats (124).
Estrogen and oxidative stress in diabetes
It has been shown that exogenous estrogen lowers a
woman’s risk of cardiovascular disease (125). Furthermore,
pancreatic islet b-cells are protected against oxidative injury and
proinflammatory cytokine-induced apoptosis through the
induction of estrogen receptor-a expression (126, 127). A recent
study, which used a model of hyperglycemia-induced persistent
oxidative stress, showed that activation of the estrogen receptor-
b diminishes generation of ROS, which leads to improved
wound-healing in T2DM rats (128). Additionally, estrogen-
replacement therapy leads to decreased free radical generation
and enhanced insulin sensitivity (129). Thus, estrogens could be
an attractive therapeutic agent in T2DM postmenopausal
women, however, their potential side-effects must be taken into
account. Future studies are required to better understand their
potential benefit.
IMMUNE-TARGETED THERAPIES
Reducing cardiovascular risk is a major goal in the treatment
of patients with prediabetes and diabetes (130). Since there is a
mutual relationship between systemic inflammation and several
metabolic 
parameters, 
interest 
in 
the 
effects 
of
immunomodulatory agents on classical CVD risk factors is
increasing (131-134). Furthermore, drugs used in conventional
therapies are also being investigated for their ability to reduce
systemic inflammation. These include anti-hypertensive drugs,
statins, anti-platelets, and antihyperglycemic agents (135).
Several clinical studies have been performed to investigate the
effects of immunotargeted treatments on inflammation, insulin
resistance, and glucose control (131).
Interleukin antagonists
Anakinra is an IL-1 receptor antagonist that was shown to
reduce levels of hs-CRP and effectively improve glycemic
control in T2DM patients (136). Tocilizumab is a humanized
monoclonal antibody against the IL-6 receptor and was shown to
improve insulin sensitivity in RA patients (137). Since IL-6 has
been shown to be involved in obesity-associated inflammation,
which is linked with insulin-resistance, it will be an interesting
target for treatment in the future (138, 139). IL-1b antagonists
have a more defined action on metabolic profile, including
antihyperglycemic effects, which acts via increased B-cell
secretory function. Gevokizumab is a recombinant human
monoclonal antibody which has been demonstrated to neutralize
IL-1b and reduce inflammatory biomarkers in diabetic patients
(140). Canakinumab is an engineered human monoclonal
antibody targeting IL-1b. Data from the CANTOS study shows
that canakinumab reduces the risk of major recurrent
cardiovascular events and further studies have been planned that
will address its effects on glycemic levels in diabetic patients
(141, 142). These studies will also investigate its actions on
insulin resistance, which is known to stimulate an increase in
CRP levels. It was previously observed that canakinumab had no
significant effect on glucose control, however, in that group,
baseline HbA1c value was already optimal (143). LY2189102 is
a neutralizing IL-1b antibody which significantly reduced
inflammatory biomarkers such as hs-CRP and IL-6, while also
modestly reducing HbA1c and fasting glucose levels in T2DM
patients (144).
Tumor necrosis factor-a antagonists
Increased insulin resistance is often seen in RA patients and
this is thought to be caused in part by the presence of high-grade
systemic inflammation (145). Many phase IV studies show that
TNF-a blockers consistently decrease levels of CRP and have a
protective effect against cardiovascular events in RA patients.
However, since there is a large inflammatory component in RA,
this result might be due to RA disease control rather than an
inherent reduction in cardiovascular risk (145). Sources of TNF-
α which should be targeted are currently a topic of interest.
While B cells are not considered a primary source in metabolic
pathologies, B cell-specific depletion of TNF-a inhibits
atherosclerosis and plaque vulnerability (146).
In a recent study involving non-diabetic patients suffering
from psoriasis, treatment with adalimumab, a monoclonal
antibody inhibiting TNF-a, increased insulin sensitivity (147).
815

In this group of patients, insulin sensitivity prior to adalimumab
treatment negatively correlated with CRP level. Furthermore, in
studies involving RA patients, adalimumab and infliximab
significantly improved insulin sensitivity (96, 137, 145).
Etanercept improved insulin sensitivity in RA subjects (137),
however, in patients with psoriasis or T2DM, there was no such
effect (148, 149).
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY ACTIVITY 
OF ANTI-DIABETIC DRUGS
Aside from reducing blood glucose levels, a number of
antihyperglycemic agents are known to possess anti-
inflammatory activity (150). However, it is important to
differentiate between anti-inflammatory effects due to improved
glucose control and anti-inflammatory effects due to the intrinsic
actions of the antihyperglycemic drug. Insulin sensitizers such as
thiazolidinediones (PPAR-g agonist) and metformin (AMPK
activator) have greater anti-inflammatory activity than insulin
secretagogues, such as sulphonylureas or glinides (151). Of
these, thiazolidinediones have been the most effective in
lowering tissue and serum inflammation. Alpha-glucosidase
inhibitors have a modest effect on inflammatory markers, while
dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-4 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists
exert pleiotropic effects and are more effective in this regard. In
fact, the possible effects of DPP-4 inhibitors extends into all
diseases linked to mitochondrial oxidative stress. For example, a
recent experimental study has shown that it improved
mitochondrial biogenesis in mice with heart failure via
activation of GLP-1 receptor signaling (152). Recent clinical
trials have shown that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce cardiovascular
816
Antihyperglycemic agent
Effects on inflammation and oxidative stress
GLP-1 agonists

([HQGLQ
- 5HGXFWLRQRI/36LQGXFHGLQIODPPDWLRQLQDGLSRF\WHVDQGDGLSRVHWLVVXH
PDFURSKDJHV
/LUDJOXWLGH
- &53UHGXFWLRQLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
([HQDWLGH
- &53UHGXFWLRQLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
Biguanides

0HWIRUPLQ
- &53UHGXFWLRQLQ,*7DQG7'0SDWLHQWV
- 5HGXFWLRQRIYDULRXVSURLQIODPPDWRU\F\WRNLQHVIURPPRQRF\WHVDQGO\PSKRF\WHV
LQ,*7SDWLHQWV
Thiazolidinediones

5RVLJOLWD]RQH
- 5HGXFHGLQIODPPDWRU\PDUNHUVDQGVXSHUR[LGHDQLRQSURGXFWLRQLQKLELWLRQRI
XELTXLWLQSURWHDVRPHDFWLYLW\LQDWKHURVFOHURWLFSODTXHVRI7'0SDWLHQWV>@
3LRJOLWD]RQH
- 5HGXFHGDGLSRVHWLVVXHPDFURSKDJHDFFXPXODWLRQDQGDFWLYLW\GHFUHDVHGVHFUHWLRQ
RIFKHPRDWWUDFWDQWVDQGSURLQIODPPDWRU\F\WRNLQHVLQQHXWURSKLOVPDFURSKDJHV
DQGGHQGULWLFFHOOVLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
- 'HFUHDVHG,/,/%DQGPHWDEROLFDFWLYLW\RI9$7LQREHVHVXEMHFWVDQG
,*77'0VXEMHFWV
- 'HFUHDVHGFRURQDU\DUWHU\LQIODPPDWLRQLQ,*7DQG7'0VXEMHFWVLQGHSHQGHQWRI
JOXFRVHORZHULQJHIIHFWV
Sulphonylureas

*OLEHQFODPLGHJO\EXULGH
- 5HGXFHGF\WRNLQHSURGXFWLRQIURPQHXWURSKLOVLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
- ,Q7'0SDWLHQWVLQIODPPDWRU\F\WRNLQHVDIWHUWUHDWPHQWZLWKJO\EXULGHZDV
VLJQLILFDQWO\ORZHUWKDQLQLQVXOLQWUHDWHGJURXS
Glinides

5HSDJOLQLGH
- 5HGXFHGOHYHOVRI3$,KV&53DQG2+G*LQ-DSDQHVH7'0SDWLHQWV
0LWLJOLQLGH
- 5HGXFHGOHYHOVRIR[LGDWLYHVWUHVVDQGLQIODPPDWRU\PDUNHUV,/,/DQG
71)ĮLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
DPP-4 inhibitors

6LWDJOLSWLQ
- 5HGXFWLRQRI&5371)Į7/57/5,..ȕ&&5LQ7'0SDWLHQWV

- 6LJQLILFDQWO\LPSURYHGLQIODPPDWRU\VWDWHDQGHQGRWKHOLDOIXQFWLRQLQSDWLHQWVZLWK
FRURQDU\DUWHU\GLVHDVHDQG7'0LQGHSHQGHQWRILWVK\SRJO\FHPLFDFWLYLW\
/LQDJOLSWLQ
- 5HGXFWLRQRISURVWDJODQGLQ(KV&53DQG,/OHYHOVLQ7'0SDWLHQWV
XQGHUJRLQJKHPRGLDO\VLV
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors 
0LJOLWRO
- ,PSURYHGIORZPHGLDWHGGLODWLRQDQGUHGXFHG&53LQSDWLHQWVZLWK7'0DQG
FRURQDU\KHDUWGLVHDVH
SGLT2 antagonists
(PSDJOLIOR]LQ
- 5HGXFWLRQLQFDUGLRYDVFXODUGHDWKDQGDOOFDXVHPRUWDOLW\LQSDWLHQWVZLWK
HVWDEOLVKHG&9'DQG7'0
'DSDJOLIOR]LQ
- ,PSURYHGIORZPHGLDWHGGLODWLRQDQGGHFUHDVHGR[LGDWLYHVWUHVVDVPHDVXUHGE\
OHYHOVRIXULQH2+G*DQGSODVPDLVR3*)ĮLQ7'0VXEMHFWV
Selected studies in human models involving various antihyperglycemic drugs.
Table 1. Anti-diabetic drugs and their effects on inflammation and oxidative stress.

and all-cause mortality in diabetic patients with cardiovascular
diseases (153) and reduce levels of oxidative stress (154-156).
Selected studies examining the anti-inflammatory effects of
antihyperglycemic drugs are listed in Table 1.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
Drugs of this class, which include liraglutide and exenatide,
reduce glycemic levels through the activation of GLP-1
receptors in pancreatic acinar cells, which stimulates secretion of
insulin and suppression of glucagon secretion. Demonstrated to
have anti-inflammatory effects in various cell types such as
HUVECs, glomerular endothelial cells, monocytes and
macrophages, GLP-1 receptor agonists are thought to exert their
anti-inflammatory action through inhibition of the IkB kinase
beta/NF-kB and JNK pathways (150). These properties are also
exhibited on the level of vascular pathology dependent on
inflammation and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, as
GLP-1 vascular delivery prevents neointimal formation in
diabetic mice (157). Novel mechanisms of this process are being
unraveled, including a recent study on the role of semaphorin-3,
which may act as a novel therapeutic target (158).
Endogenous GLP-1 is biologically active for only a short
period, on the order of 1 – 2 minutes, since it is rapidly cleaved
and inactivated by DPP-4 (159). Its cleavage product, GLP-1(9-
36)amide, acts independently of the GLP-1 receptor and is less
insulinotropic than GLP-1. In human arterial endothelial cells,
GLP-1(9-36)amide
has been shown to prevent increased
superoxide production by mitochondria following exposure to
high glucose or high levels of FFAs (160, 161). Additionally,
evidence suggests that GLP-1(9-36)amide exerts atheroprotective
effects in advanced inflammatory conditions, acting through NF-
kB-dependent pathways (162). Thus, GLP-1(9-36)amide should
prove to be an interesting target for future studies related to
oxidative stress.
Metformin
This is the first line oral treatment for patients with T2DM.
The glucose-reducing effect of metformin is thought to be
mediated through activation of AMPK, ultimately leading to
suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Along with its
antihyperglycemic effects and its ability to improve insulin
resistance (163), metformin is thought to possess anti-
inflammatory activity (150), and might inhibit NF-kB activation
in macrophages, leading to a reduction in the proinflammatory
cytokines IL-1B, IL-6, and TNF-a (164). Other potential
pathways of anti-inflammatory activity include inhibition of NF-
kB through the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt
pathway in human vascular smooth muscle cells and inhibition
of AGEs (150). Although several studies have demonstrated that
metformin reduces inflammatory biomarkers, others have shown
this not to be the case (165-168). Thus, the potential anti-
inflammatory effects of metformin should be further studied to
clarify these discrepancies.
Sulfonylureas
Sulfonylureas are one of the groups of drugs recommended
when metformin is contraindicated, however they have the
potential to induce hypoglycemia and weight gain (169). A
commonly used drug from this class is glibenclamide, which
works by inhibiting ATP-sensitive potassium channels in
pancreatic beta cells, leading to insulin release. Recent studies
have suggested that glibenclamide possesses anti-inflammatory
activity (170-173). Possible mechanisms include inhibition of
the IL-4/IL-13 signaling pathways and reduced NLRP3
inflammasome activation, leading to decreased production of
TNF-a, IL-1B, and ROS (174, 175).
Glinides
These drugs act via a similar mechanism as sulfonylureas, in
that they bind to ATP-dependent potassium channels on
pancreatic beta cells, leading to insulin secretion. However, they
have a weaker binding affinity and dissociate faster from the
sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) binding site. In a study
involving Japanese T2DM patients, repaglinide reduced markers
of inflammation and oxidative stress (176).
Thiazolidinediones (PPAR-g agonists)
This class of antidiabetic drugs works by activating PPAR-g,
which stimulates increased storage of FFAs in adipocytes.
Because of this, cells utilize more carbohydrates for their energy
requirements, thus decreasing circulating glucose levels (177).
PPAR-g is mainly expressed in adipose tissue and has been
demonstrated to reduce markers of inflammation in a variety of
tissues (178, 179). The ability of thiazolidinediones to activate
glucocorticoid nuclear translocation appears to be independent
of PPAR-g and partially explains their anti-inflammatory activity
(178). In addition, rosiglitazone decreased inflammatory
activity, likely via
downregulation of NF-kB-mediated
pathways, which led to atherosclerotic plaque stabilization in
T2DM patients (180).
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
This class of medication, including acarbose and miglitol,
reversibly inhibits alpha-glucosidases, specifically in the brush
border of the small intestine. As a consequence, there is reduced
hydrolysis of complex carbohydrates into monosaccharides and
delayed absorption of glucose from the gut (181). There are
several conflicting reports on the effects of alpha-glucosidase
inhibitors on inflammatory markers, however, it appears that
they modestly reduce CRP levels in T2DM patients (182).
Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (gliflozins)
This novel class of drugs inhibit sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2), the major cotransporter responsible for
reabsorption of glucose in the kidney. This causes more glucose
to be eliminated in the urine, reducing plasma glucose levels in
T2DM patients (153, 183). The EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial
showed that empagliflozin significantly reduced cardiovascular
death and all-cause mortality in patients with established CVD
and T2DM (153). Although some recent evidence suggests that
SGLT2 inhibitors may provide beneficial effects on the renal and
cardiovascular system, it is unclear whether they can slow
atherosclerotic progression in T2DM patients (184, 185).
Because of this, the EMBLEM trial, a prospective multicenter
clinical trial in Japan, was designed to assess the effect of
empagliflozin on endothelial function and is currently ongoing
(as of publication of this review) (185). In clinical trials
involving T2DM patients, dapagliflozin significantly improved
flow-mediated dilation and lowered levels of urine 8-OHdG and
plasma 8-iso PGF2a, indicating a decreased level of oxidative
stress (154, 155).
Conclusions
Early diagnosis and treatment of hyperglycemia in
prediabetic patients are needed, as impaired pancreatic beta-cell
function along with insulin resistance is already present years
817

before the development of T2DM. Because of the high risk of
morbidity and mortality due to CVDs associated with diabetes,
it is imperative that treatment plans are initiated early enough to
prevent such complications from developing. Oxidative stress
and inflammation during prediabetes could be useful targets for
clinicians in the future to prevent progression of prediabetes to
T2DM. Targeted immunotherapies and antihyperglycemic
medication could one day play an important role in improving
the inflammatory state in patients with prediabetes and diabetes.
Abbreviations: 8-epi-PGF2a, 8-epi-prostaglandin F2a; 8-
OHdG, 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine; AGE, advanced glycation
end products; AMPK, 5’adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase; ATF3, activating transcription factor 3; BPIFB4,
bactericidal/permeability-increasing fold-containing-family-B-
member-4; CRP, C-reactive protein; CVD, cardiovascular disease;
CYBA, cytochrome B-245 alpha chain; DAG, diacylglycerol;
DPP, dipeptidyl peptidase; EDHF, endothelium-derived
hyperpolarizing factor; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase;
EN-RAGE, extracellular newly identified receptor for advanced
glycation end-products binding protein; FFA, free fatty acids;
FMD, flow-mediated dilation; GDF, growth/differentiation factor;
GLP, glucagon-like peptide; GSH, glutathione; GSSG, glutathione
disulfide; HDL, high density lipoprotein; HFD, high fat diet;
HMGB, 
high-mobility 
group 
box; 
HMVEC, 
human
microvascular endothelial cells; hs-CRP, high sensitivity CRP;
HUAEC, human umbilical artery endothelial cells; HUVEC,
human umbilical vein endothelial cells; ICAM, intercellular
adhesion molecule; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired
glucose tolerance; IKKb, inhibitory-kB kinase; IL, interleukin;
IRS, insulin receptor substrate; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase;
LDL, low density lipoprotein; LOX-1, lectin-like oxidized LDL
receptor-1; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MAPK, mitogen-activated
protein kinase; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant protein; MetS,
metabolic syndrome; miRNA, microRNA; MR, mineralocorticoid
receptor; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate;
NFG, normal fasting glucose; NF-kB, nuclear factor kappa-light-
chain-enhancer of activated B cells; NLRP-3, nucleotide-binding
domain, leucine-rich-containing family pyrin domain-containing-
3; NO, nitric oxide; Nrf2, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor
2; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PI3K-Akt,
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PON,
paraoxonase; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors;
RA, rheumatoid arthritis; RAGE, receptor for AGE; ROS, reactive
oxygen species; SAT, subcutaneous adipose tissue; SLE, systemic
lupus erythematosus; SOD, superoxide dismutase; SUR1,
sulfonylyrea receptor 1; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; TGF,
transforming growth factor; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF, tumor
necrosis factor; UCP1, uncoupling protein 1; VAT, visceral
adipose tissue; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion protein; VSMC,
vascular smooth muscle cells; WAT, white adipose tissue.
Acknowledgements: This manuscript was supported by the
Polish National Centre for Research and development ((ERA-
CVD/PLAQUEFIGHT/5/2018 (K/NCB/000048-TJG) and ERA-
CVD/NEMO/7/2019 (K/NCB/000052-TPM)).
Conflict of interests: None declared.
REFERENCES
1.
Hossain P, Kawar B, El Nahas M. Obesity and diabetes in
the developing world - a growing challenge. N Engl J Med
2007; 356: 213-215.
2.
Ogurtsova K, da Rocha Fernandes JD, Huang Y, et al. IDF
diabetes atlas: global estimates for the prevalence of
diabetes for 2015 and 2040. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2017;
128: 40-50.
3.
Falkner B, Cossrow ND. Prevalence of metabolic syndrome
and obesity-associated hypertension in the racial ethnic
minorities of the United States. Curr Hypertens Rep 2014;
16: 449. doi: 10.1007/s11906-014-0449-5
4.
Yuan F, Woollard JR, Jordan KL, Lerman A, Lerman LO,
Eirin A. Mitochondrial targeted peptides preserve
mitochondrial organization and decrease reversible
myocardial changes in early swine metabolic syndrome.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 431-442.
5.
Pendergrass M, Bertoldo A, Bonadonna R, et al. Muscle
glucose transport and phosphorylation in type 2 diabetic,
obese nondiabetic, and genetically predisposed individuals.
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2007; 292: E92-E100.
6.
Abdul-Ghani MA, Tripathy D, DeFronzo RA. Contributions
of beta-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance to the
pathogenesis of impaired glucose tolerance and impaired
fasting glucose. Diabetes Care 2006; 29: 1130-1139.
7.
Guzik TJ, Cosentino F. Epigenetics and immunometabolism
in diabetes and aging. Antioxid Redox Signal 2018; 29:
257-274.
8.
Konior A, Schramm A, Czesnikiewicz-Guzik M, Guzik TJ.
NADPH oxidases in vascular pathology. Antioxid Redox
Signal 2014; 20: 2794-2814.
9.
Murphy E, Amanakis G, Fillmore N, Parks RJ, Sun J. Sex
differences in metabolic cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res
2017; 113: 370-377.
10. Ventura-Clapier R, Dworatzek E, Seeland U, et al. Sex in
basic research: concepts in the cardiovascular field.
Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 711-724.
11. Rudich A, Tirosh A, Potashnik R, Hemi R, Kanety H,
Bashan N. Prolonged oxidative stress impairs insulin-
induced GLUT4 translocation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
Diabetes 1998; 47: 1562-1569.
12. Maddux BA, See W, Lawrence JC, Jr., Goldfine AL,
Goldfine ID, Evans JL. Protection against oxidative stress-
induced insulin resistance in rat L6 muscle cells by
mircomolar concentrations of alpha-lipoic acid. Diabetes
2001; 50: 404-10.
13. Furukawa S, Fujita T, Shimabukuro M, et al. Increased
oxidative stress in obesity and its impact on metabolic
syndrome. J Clin Invest 2004; 114: 1752-1761.
14. Meigs JB, Larson MG, Fox CS, Keaney JF, Vasan RS,
Benjamin EJ. Association of oxidative stress, insulin
resistance, and diabetes risk phenotypes: the Framingham
Offspring Study. Diabetes Care 2007; 30: 2529-2535.
15. Gopaul NK, Manraj MD, Hebe A, et al. Oxidative stress
could precede endothelial dysfunction and insulin resistance
in Indian Mauritians with impaired glucose metabolism.
Diabetologia 2001; 44: 706-712.
16. Urakawa H, Katsuki A, Sumida Y, et al. Oxidative stress is
associated with adiposity and insulin resistance in men. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2003; 88: 4673-4676.
17. Houstis N, Rosen ED, Lander ES. Reactive oxygen species
have a causal role in multiple forms of insulin resistance.
Nature 2006; 440: 944-948.
18. Vacca M, Di Eusanio M, Cariello M, et al. Integrative
miRNA and whole-genome analyses of epicardial adipose
tissue in patients with coronary atherosclerosis. Cardiovasc
Res 2016; 109: 228-239.
19. Crim WS, Wu R, Carter JD, et al. AGI-1067, a novel
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent, enhances insulin
release and protects mouse islets. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2010;
323: 246-255.
20. Tardif JC, McMurray JJ, Klug E, et al. Effects of
succinobucol (AGI-1067) after an acute coronary syndrome:
818

a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2008; 371: 1761-1768.
21. Tsai SH, Lu G, Xu X, Ren Y, Hein TW, Kuo L. Enhanced
endothelin-1/Rho-kinase 
signalling 
and 
coronary
microvascular dysfunction in hypertensive myocardial
hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1329-1337.
22. Migrino RQ, Davies HA, Truran S, et al. Amyloidogenic
medin induces endothelial dysfunction and vascular
inflammation through the receptor for advanced glycation
endproducts. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1389-1402.
23. Sorop O, Olver TD, van de Wouw J, et al. The
microcirculation: a key player in obesity-associated
cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1035-
1045.
24. Chong CR, Clarke K, Levelt E. Metabolic remodelling in
diabetic cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 422-430.
25. Kalfon R, Koren L, Aviram S, Schwartz O, Hai T, Aronheim
A. ATF3 expression in cardiomyocytes preserves
homeostasis in the heart and controls peripheral glucose
tolerance. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 134-146.
26. Anderson EJ, Lustig ME, Boyle KE, et al. Mitochondrial
H2O2 emission and cellular redox state link excess fat intake
to insulin resistance in both rodents and humans. J Clin
Invest 2009; 119: 573-581.
27. Evans JL, Goldfine ID, Maddux BA, Grodsky GM.
Oxidative stress and stress-activated signaling pathways: a
unifying hypothesis of type 2 diabetes. Endocr Rev 2002; 23:
599-622.
28. Jeong EM, Chung J, Liu H, et al. Role of mitochondrial
oxidative stress in glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, and
cardiac diastolic dysfunction. J Am Heart Assoc 2016; 5:
e003046.
29. Ozden O, Park SH, Kim HS, et al. Acetylation of MnSOD
directs enzymatic activity responding to cellular nutrient
status or oxidative stress. Aging (Albany NY) 2011; 3: 
102-107.
30. Shafique E, Torina A, Reichert K, et al. Mitochondrial redox
plays a critical role in the paradoxical effects of NAPDH
oxidase-derived ROS on coronary endothelium. Cardiovasc
Res 2017; 113: 234-246.
31. Jansen F, Yang X, Franklin BS, et al. High glucose condition
increases NADPH oxidase activity in endothelial
microparticles that promote vascular inflammation.
Cardiovasc Res 2013; 98: 94-106.
32. Zhou ZW, Xie XL, Zhou SF, Li CG. Mechanism of reversal
of high glucose-induced endothelial nitric oxide synthase
uncoupling by tanshinone IIA in human endothelial cell line
EA.hy926. Eur J Pharmacol 2012; 697: 97-105.
33. Drummond GR, Selemidis S, Griendling KK, Sobey CG.
Combating oxidative stress in vascular disease: NADPH
oxidases as therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2011;
10: 453-471.
34. Schramm A, Matusik P, Osmenda G, Guzik TJ. Targeting
NADPH oxidases in vascular pharmacology. Vascul
Pharmacol 2012; 56: 216-231.
35. Taye A, Saad AH, Kumar AH, Morawietz H. Effect of
apocynin on NADPH oxidase-mediated oxidative stress-
LOX-1-eNOS pathway in human endothelial cells exposed
to high glucose. Eur J Pharmacol 2010; 627: 42-48.
36. Patel H, Chen J, Das KC, Kavdia M. Hyperglycemia induces
differential change in oxidative stress at gene expression and
functional levels in HUVEC and HMVEC. Cardiovasc
Diabetol 2013; 12: 142. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-142
37. Fukai T, Siegfried MR, Ushio-Fukai M, Cheng Y, Kojda G,
Harrison DG. Regulation of the vascular extracellular
superoxide dismutase by nitric oxide and exercise training.
J Clin Invest 2000; 105: 1631-1639.
38. Landmesser U, Dikalov S, Price SR, et al. Oxidation of
tetrahydrobiopterin leads to uncoupling of endothelial cell
nitric oxide synthase in hypertension. J Clin Invest 2003;
111: 1201-1209.
39. Sorop O, Heinonen I, van Kranenburg M, et al. Multiple
common comorbidities produce left ventricular diastolic
dysfunction associated with coronary microvascular
dysfunction, oxidative stress, and myocardial stiffening.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 954-964.
40. Bibli SI, Zhou Z, Zukunft S, et al. Tyrosine phosphorylation
of eNOS regulates myocardial survival after an ischaemic
insult: role of PYK2. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 926-937.
41. Wan A, Rodrigues B. Endothelial cell-cardiomyocyte
crosstalk in diabetic cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res 2016;
111: 172-183.
42. Perkins JM, Joy NG, Tate DB, Davis SN. Acute effects of
hyperinsulinemia 
and 
hyperglycemia 
on 
vascular
inflammatory biomarkers and endothelial function in
overweight and obese humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 2015; 309: E168-E176.
43. Navickas R, Gal D, Laucevicius A, Taparauskaite A,
Zdanyte M, Holvoet P. Identifying circulating microRNAs
as biomarkers of cardiovascular disease: a systematic
review. Cardiovasc Res 2016; 111: 322-337.
44. Welten SM, Goossens EA, Quax PH, Nossent AY. The
multifactorial nature of microRNAs in vascular remodelling.
Cardiovasc Res 2016; 110: 6-22.
45. Chen M, Yi B, Zhu N, et al. Pim1 kinase promotes
angiogenesis through phosphorylation of endothelial nitric
oxide synthase at Ser-633. Cardiovasc Res 2016; 109:
141-150.
46. Spinelli CC, Carrizzo A, Ferrario A, et al. LAV-BPIFB4
isoform modulates eNOS signalling through Ca2+/PKC-
alpha-dependent mechanism. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113:
795-804.
47. Chen M, Nagase M, Fujita T, Narumiya S, Masaki T,
Sawamura T. Diabetes enhances lectin-like oxidized LDL
receptor-1 (LOX-1) expression in the vascular endothelium:
possible role of LOX-1 ligand and AGE. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2001; 287: 962-968.
48. Dincer Y, Akcay T, Alademir Z, Ilkova H. Effect of oxidative
stress on glutathione pathway in red blood cells from
patients 
with 
insulin-dependent 
diabetes 
mellitus.
Metabolism 2002; 51: 1360-1362.
49. Ceriello A, Novials A, Ortega E, et al. Glucagon-like peptide 1
reduces endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, and oxidative
stress induced by both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia in
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013; 36: 2346-2350.
50. Guzik TJ, Mussa S, Gastaldi D, et al. Mechanisms of
increased vascular superoxide production in human diabetes
mellitus: role of NAD(P)H oxidase and endothelial nitric
oxide synthase. Circulation 2002; 105: 1656-1662.
51. Al-Aubaidy HA, Jelinek HF. Oxidative DNA damage:
antioxidant response in postprandial hyperglycaemia in type
2 diabetes mellitus. Br J Diabetes Vasc Dis 2011; 11: 87-91.
52. Al-Aubaidy HA, Jelinek HF. Oxidative stress and
triglycerides as predictors of subclinical atherosclerosis in
prediabetes. Redox Rep 2014; 19: 87-91.
53. Keaney JF, Larson MG, Vasan RS, et al. Obesity and
systemic oxidative stress: clinical correlates of oxidative
stress in the Framingham Study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 2003; 23: 434-439.
54. Guzik TJ, Skiba DS, Touyz RM, Harrison DG. The role of
infiltrating immune cells in dysfunctional adipose tissue.
Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1009-1023.
55. Owen JB, Butterfield DA. Measurement of oxidized/reduced
glutathione ratio. Methods Mol Biol 2010; 648: 269-277.
819

56. Maschirow L, Khalaf K, Al-Aubaidy HA, Jelinek HF.
Inflammation, coagulation, endothelial dysfunction and
oxidative stress in prediabetes - biomarkers as a possible tool
for early disease detection for rural screening. Clin Biochem
2015; 48: 581-585.
57. Hu B, Li D, Sawamura T, Mehta JL. Oxidized LDL through
LOX-1 modulates LDL-receptor expression in human
coronary artery endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2003; 307: 1008-1012.
58. Ding Z, Liu S, Wang X, et al. PCSK9 regulates expression
of scavenger receptors and ox-LDL uptake in macrophages.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 1145-1153.
59. Morawietz H, Rueckschloss U, Niemann B, et al.
Angiotensin II induces LOX-1, the human endothelial
receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein. Circulation
1999; 100: 899-902.
60. Dunn S, Vohra RS, Murphy JE, Homer-Vanniasinkam S,
Walker JH, Ponnambalam S. The lectin-like oxidized low-
density-lipoprotein receptor: a pro-inflammatory factor in
vascular disease. Biochem J 2008; 409: 349-355.
61. Guzik TJ, Schramm A, Czesnikiewicz-Guzik M. Functional
implications of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in human
blood vessels. In: Systems Biology of Free Radicals and
Antioxidants. Laher I, (ed.) Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg 2014. pp. 1155-1176.
62. Frati G, Schirone L, Chimenti I, et al. An overview of the
inflammatory signalling mechanisms in the myocardium
underlying the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy.
Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 378-388.
63. Jia D, He Y, Zhu Q, et al. RAGE-mediated extracellular matrix
proteins accumulation exacerbates HySu-induced pulmonary
hypertension. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 586-597.
64. Nguyen T, Nioi P, Pickett CB. The Nrf2-antioxidant
response element signaling pathway and its activation by
oxidative stress. J Biol Chem 2009; 284: 13291-13295.
65. Yagishita Y, Fukutomi T, Sugawara A, et al. Nrf2 protects
pancreatic beta-cells from oxidative and nitrosative stress in
diabetic model mice. Diabetes 2014; 63: 605-618.
66. Yu Z, Shao W, Chiang Y, et al. Oltipraz upregulates the
nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (corrected)
(NRF2) antioxidant system and prevents insulin resistance
and obesity induced by a high-fat diet in C57BL/6J mice.
Diabetologia 2011; 54: 922-934.
67. Jimenez-Osorio AS, Picazo A, Gonzalez-Reyes S, Barrera-
Oviedo D, Rodriguez-Arellano ME, Pedraza-Chaverri J.
Nrf2 and redox status in prediabetic and diabetic patients. Int
J Mol Sci 2014; 15: 20290-20305.
68. Nus M, Martinez-Poveda B, MacGrogan D, et al.
Endothelial Jag1-RBPJ signalling promotes inflammatory
leucocyte recruitment and atherosclerosis. Cardiovasc Res
2016; 112: 568-580.
69. Fan Y, Zhang J, Chen CY, et al. Macrophage migration
inhibitory factor triggers vascular smooth muscle cell
dedifferentiation by a p68-serum response factor axis.
Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 519-530.
70. Durham AL, Speer MY, Scatena M, Giachelli CM, Shanahan
CM. Role of smooth muscle cells in vascular calcification:
implications in atherosclerosis and arterial stiffness.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 590-600.
71. Vilahur G, Ben-Aicha S, Badimon L. New insights into the
role of adipose tissue in thrombosis. Cardiovasc Res 2017;
113: 1046-1054.
72. Abdurrachim D, Nabben M, Hoerr V, et al. Diabetic db/db
mice do not develop heart failure upon pressure overload: a
longitudinal in vivo PET, MRI, and MRS study on cardiac
metabolic, structural, and functional adaptations. Cardiovasc
Res 2017; 113: 1148-1160.
73. Brahimaj A, Ligthart S, Ghanbari M, et al. Novel
inflammatory markers for incident pre-diabetes and type 2
diabetes: the Rotterdam Study. Eur J Epidemiol 2017; 32: 217-
226.
74. Li Y, Kanellakis P, Hosseini H, et al. A CD1d-dependent
lipid antagonist to NKT cells ameliorates atherosclerosis in
ApoE-/- mice by reducing lesion necrosis and inflammation.
Cardiovasc Res 2016; 109: 305-317.
75. Akoumianakis I, Antoniades C. The interplay between
adipose tissue and the cardiovascular system: is fat always
bad? Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 999-1008.
76. Abu Bakar H, Robert Dunn W, Daly C, Ralevic V. Sensory
innervation of perivascular adipose tissue: a crucial role in
artery vasodilatation and leptin release. Cardiovasc Res
2017; 113: 962-972.
77. Antoniades 
C. 
‘Dysfunctional’ 
adipose 
tissue 
in
cardiovascular disease: a reprogrammable target or an
innocent bystander? Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 997-998.
78. Antonopoulos AS, Tousoulis D. The molecular mechanisms
of obesity paradox. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1074-1086.
79. Badimon L, Cubedo J. Adipose tissue depots and
inflammation: 
effects 
on 
plasticity 
and 
resident
mesenchymal stem cell function. Cardiovasc Res 2017;
113: 1064-1073.
80. Icli B, Feinberg MW. MicroRNAs in dysfunctional adipose
tissue: cardiovascular implications. Cardiovasc Res 2017;
113: 1024-1034.
81. Jia G, Aroor AR, Sowers JR. The role of mineralocorticoid
receptor signaling in the cross-talk between adipose tissue and
the vascular wall. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1055-1063.
82. Steven S, Dib M, Hausding M, et al. CD40L controls
obesity-associated vascular inflammation, oxidative stress,
and endothelial dysfunction in high fat diet-treated and
db/db mice. Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 312-323.
83. Nishida K, Otsu K. Inflammation and metabolic
cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 389-398.
84. Antonopoulos AS, Margaritis M, Coutinho P, et al.
Adiponectin as a link between type 2 diabetes and vascular
NADPH oxidase activity in the human arterial wall: the
regulatory role of perivascular adipose tissue. Diabetes
2015; 64: 2207-2219.
85. Yang RZ, Lee MJ, Hu H, et al. Identification of omentin as
a novel depot-specific adipokine in human adipose tissue:
possible role in modulating insulin action. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab 2006; 290: E1253-E1261.
86. De Jager SC, Pasterkamp G. Atheroprotective properties of
human 
omentin-1 
in 
experimental 
atherosclerosis.
Cardiovasc Res 2016; 110: 1-3.
87. Hiramatsu-Ito M, Shibata R, Ohashi K, et al. Omentin
attenuates atherosclerotic lesion formation in apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice. Cardiovasc Res 2016; 110: 107-117.
88. Tan BK, Adya R, Farhatullah S, Chen J, Lehnert H, Randeva
HS. Metformin treatment may increase omentin-1 levels in
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Diabetes 2010; 59:
3023-3031.
89. Pradhan AD, Manson JE, Rifai N, Buring JE, Ridker PM. C-
reactive protein, interleukin 6, and risk of developing type 2
diabetes mellitus. JAMA 2001; 286: 327-334.
90. Grossmann V, Schmitt VH, Zeller T, et al. Profile of the
immune and inflammatory response in individuals with
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015; 38:
1356-1364.
91. Jansen T, Kroller-Schon S, Schonfelder T, et al.
Alpha1AMPK deletion in myelomonocytic cells induces a
pro-inflammatory phenotype and enhances angiotensin II-
induced vascular dysfunction. Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114:
1883-1893.
820

92. Chou CH, Hung CS, Liao CW, et al. IL-6 trans-signalling
contributes to aldosterone-induced cardiac fibrosis.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 690-702.
93. Tsigos C, Papanicolaou DA, Kyrou I, Defensor R, Mitsiadis
CS, Chrousos GP. Dose-dependent effects of recombinant
human interleukin-6 on glucose regulation. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1997; 82: 4167-4170.
94. Stith RD, Luo J. Endocrine and carbohydrate responses to
interleukin-6 in vivo. Circ Shock 1994; 44: 210-215.
95. Wang WK, Wang B, Lu QH, et al. Inhibition of high-
mobility group box 1 improves myocardial fibrosis and
dysfunction in diabetic cardiomyopathy. Int J Cardiol 2014;
172: 202-212.
96. Stagakis I, Bertsias G, Karvounaris S, et al. Anti-tumor
necrosis factor therapy improves insulin resistance, beta cell
function and insulin signaling in active rheumatoid arthritis
patients with high insulin resistance. Arthritis Res Ther
2012; 14: R141. doi: 10.1186/ar3874
97. Akash MS, Rehman K, Liaqat A. Tumor necrosis factor-
alpha: role in development of insulin resistance and
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Cell Biochem
2018; 119: 105-110.
98. Tan E, Baker C, Foley P. Weight gain and tumour necrosis
factor-alpha inhibitors in patients with psoriasis. Australas J
Dermatol 2013; 54: 259-263.
99. Bacchetti T, Campanati A, Ferretti G, Simonetti O, Liberati
G, Offidani AM. Oxidative stress and psoriasis: the effect of
antitumour necrosis factor-alpha inhibitor treatment. Br J
Dermatol 2013; 168: 984-989.
100. Shu YN, Dong LH, Li H, et al. CKII-SIRT1-SM22alpha
loop evokes a self-limited inflammatory response in
vascular smooth muscle cells. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113:
1198-1207.
101. Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, et al. Chronic inflammation in
fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related
insulin resistance. J Clin Invest 2003; 112: 1821-1830.
102. Hong EG, Ko HJ, Cho YR, et al. Interleukin-10 prevents
diet-induced insulin resistance by attenuating macrophage
and cytokine response in skeletal muscle. Diabetes 2009;
58: 2525-2535.
103. Donath MY, Shoelson SE. Type 2 diabetes as an
inflammatory disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2011; 11: 98-107.
104. Kearney K, Tomlinson D, Smith K, Ajjan R.
Hypofibrinolysis in diabetes: a therapeutic target for the
reduction of cardiovascular risk. Cardiovasc Diabetol
2017; 16: 34. doi: 10.1186/s12933-017-0515-9
105. Talukdar S, Oh DY, Bandyopadhyay G, et al. Neutrophils
mediate insulin resistance in mice fed a high-fat diet
through secreted elastase. Nat Med 2012; 18: 1407-1412.
106. Tarin C, Fernandez-Garcia CE, Burillo E, et al. Lipocalin-
2 deficiency or blockade protects against aortic abdominal
aneurysm development in mice. Cardiovasc Res 2016; 111:
262-273.
107. Herder C, Carstensen M, Ouwens DM. Anti-inflammatory
cytokines and risk of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab
2013; 15 (Suppl. 3): 39-50.
108. Paneni F, Volpe M, Luscher TF, Cosentino F. SIRT1,
p66(Shc), and Set7/9 in vascular hyperglycemic memory:
bringing all the strands together. Diabetes 2013; 62: 1800-
1807.
109. Camici GG, Cosentino F, Tanner FC, Luscher TF. The role of
p66Shc deletion in age-associated arterial dysfunction and
disease states. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2008; 105: 1628-1631.
110. Paneni F, Mocharla P, Akhmedov A, et al. Gene silencing
of the mitochondrial adaptor p66(Shc) suppresses vascular
hyperglycemic memory in diabetes. Circ Res 2012; 111:
278-289.
111. Paneni F, Beckman JA, Creager MA, Cosentino F. Diabetes
and 
vascular 
disease: 
pathophysiology, 
clinical
consequences, and medical therapy: part I. Eur Heart J
2013; 34: 2436-2443.
112. Costantino S, Paneni F, Luscher TF, Cosentino F.
MicroRNA profiling unveils hyperglycaemic memory in
the diabetic heart. Eur Heart J 2016; 37: 572-576.
113. Zampetaki A, Kiechl S, Drozdov I, et al. Plasma microRNA
profiling reveals loss of endothelial miR-126 and other
microRNAs in type 2 diabetes. Circ Res 2010; 107: 810-
817.
114. Zhang Y, Sun X, Icli B, Feinberg MW. Emerging roles for
microRNAs in diabetic microvascular disease: novel
targets for therapy. Endocr Rev 2017; 38: 145-168.
115. Prattichizzo F, Giuliani A, De Nigris V, et al. Extracellular
microRNAs and endothelial hyperglycaemic memory: a
therapeutic opportunity? Diabetes Obes Metab 2016; 18:
855-867.
116. Hathaway QA, Pinti MV, Durr AJ, Waris S, Shepherd DL,
Hollander JM. Regulating microRNA expression: at the
heart of diabetes mellitus and the mitochondrion. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2018; 314: H293-H310.
117. Guo R, Nair S. Role of microRNA in diabetic
cardiomyopathy: from mechanism to intervention. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2017; 1863: 2070-2077.
118. Burnouf T, Chou ML, Goubran H, Cognasse F, Garraud O,
Seghatchian 
J. 
An 
overview 
of 
the 
role 
of
microparticles/microvesicles in blood components: are they
clinically beneficial or harmful? Transfus Apher Sci 2015;
53: 137-145.
119. Chen CW, Wang LL, Zaman S, et al. Sustained release of
endothelial progenitor cell-derived extracellular vesicles
from shear-thinning hydrogels improves angiogenesis and
promotes function after myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc
Res 2018; 114: 1029-1040.
120. Rech M, Barandiaran Aizpurua A, van Empel V, van Bilsen
M, Schroen B. Pathophysiological understanding of
HFpEF: microRNAs as part of the puzzle. Cardiovasc Res
2018; 114: 782-793.
121. Yang X, Meegan JE, Jannaway M, Coleman DC, Yuan SY.
A 
disintegrin 
and 
metalloproteinase 
15-mediated
glycocalyx shedding contributes to vascular leakage during
inflammation. Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 1752-1763.
122. Feng B, Chen Y, Luo Y, Chen M, Li X, Ni Y. Circulating
level of microparticles and their correlation with arterial
elasticity and endothelium-dependent dilation in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Atherosclerosis 2010; 208:
264-269.
123. Zhang Y, Shi L, Mei H, et al. Inflamed macrophage
microvesicles induce insulin resistance in human
adipocytes. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2015; 12: 21. doi:
10.1186/s12986-015-0016-3
124. Li J, Liu X, Fang Q, Ding M, Li C. Liraglutide attenuates
atherosclerosis via inhibiting ER-induced macrophage
derived microvesicles production in T2DM rats. Diabetol
Metab Syndr 2017; 9: 94. doi: 10.1186/s13098-017-0289-y
125. White RE. Estrogen and vascular function. Vascul
Pharmacol 2002; 38: 73-80.
126. Kilic G, Alvarez-Mercado AI, Zarrouki B, et al. The islet
estrogen receptor-a is induced by hyperglycemia and
protects against oxidative stress-induced insulin-deficient
diabetes. 
PLOS 
One
2014; 
9: 
e87941. 
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0087941
127. Le May C, Chu K, Hu M, Ortega CS, Simpson ER, Korach
KS, et al. Estrogens protect pancreatic b-cells from
apoptosis and prevent insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus in
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 9232-9237.
821

128. Zhou X, Li M, Xiao M, et al. ERb accelerates diabetic
wound healing by ameliorating hyperglycemia-induced
persistent oxidative stress. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
2019; 10: 499. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00499
129. Diaz A, Lopez-Grueso R, Gambini J. Sex differences in
age-associated type 2 diabetes in rats-role of estrogens and
oxidative stress. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2019; 2019:
6734836. 10.1155/2019/6734836
130. Raffort J, Lareyre F, Clement M, Hassen-Khodja R,
Chinetti G, Mallat Z. Diabetes and aortic aneurysm: current
state of the art. Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 1702-1713.
131. Passacquale G, Di Giosia P, Ferro A. The role of
inflammatory 
biomarkers 
in 
developing 
targeted
cardiovascular therapies: lessons from the cardiovascular
inflammation reduction trials. Cardiovasc Res 2016; 109:
9-23.
132. Collado A, Marques P, Escudero P, et al. Functional role of
endothelial CXCL16/CXCR6-platelet-leucocyte axis in
angiotensin II-associated metabolic disorders. Cardiovasc
Res 2018; 114: 1764-1775.
133. Mazur M, Glodzik J, Szczepaniak P, et al. Effects of
controlled physical activity on immune cell phenotype in
peripheral blood in prehypertension - studies in preclinical
model and randomised crossover study. J Physiol
Pharmacol 2018; 69: 875-887.
134. Zubrzycki A, Cierpka-Kmiec K, Kmiec Z, Wronska A. The
role of low-calorie diets and intermittent fasting in the
treatment of obesity and type-2 diabetes. J Physiol
Pharmacol 2018; 69: 663-683.
135. Kim EK, Cho JH, Jeong AR, et al. Anti-inflammatory
effects of simvastatin in nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs-induced small bowel injury. J Physiol Pharmacol
2017; 68: 69-77.
136. Larsen CM, Faulenbach M, Vaag A, et al. Interleukin-1-
receptor antagonist in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J
Med 2007; 356: 1517-1526.
137. Chen DY, Chen YM, Hsieh TY, Hsieh CW, Lin CC, Lan JL.
Significant effects of biologic therapy on lipid profiles and
insulin resistance in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis Res Ther 2015; 17: 52. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-
0559-8
138. Mysliwiec P, Choromanska B, Winnicka MM, et al.
Interleukin-6 deficiency modifies the effect of high fat diet
on myocardial expression of fatty acid transporters and
myocardial lipids. J Physiol Pharmacol 2018; 69: doi:
10.26402/jpp.2018.4.11
139. Sikorska D, Grzymislawska M, Roszak M, Gulbicka P,
Korybalska K, Witowski J. Simple obesity and renal
function. J Physiol Pharmacol 2017; 68: 175-180.
140. Cavelti-Weder C, Babians-Brunner A, Keller C, et al. Effects
of gevokizumab on glycemia and inflammatory markers in
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2012; 35: 1654-1662.
141. Ridker PM, Thuren T, Zalewski A, Libby P. Interleukin-
1beta inhibition and the prevention of recurrent
cardiovascular events: rationale and design of the
Canakinumab Anti-inflammatory Thrombosis Outcomes
Study (CANTOS). Am Heart J 2011; 162: 597-605.
142. Panahi 
M, 
Papanikolaou A, 
Torabi A, 
et 
al.
Immunomodulatory interventions in myocardial infarction
and heart failure: a systematic review of clinical trials and
meta-analysis of IL-1 inhibition. Cardiovasc Res 2018;
114: 1445-1461.
143. Ridker PM, Howard CP, Walter V, et al. Effects of
interleukin-1beta inhibition with canakinumab on
hemoglobin A1c, lipids, C-reactive protein, interleukin-6,
and fibrinogen: a phase IIb randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. Circulation 2012; 126: 2739-2748.
144. Sloan-Lancaster J, Abu-Raddad E, Polzer J, et al. Double-
blind, randomized study evaluating the glycemic and anti-
inflammatory effects of subcutaneous LY2189102, a
neutralizing IL-1beta antibody, in patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013; 36: 2239-2246.
145. Gonzalez-Gay MA, Gonzalez-Juanatey C, Vazquez-
Rodriguez TR, Miranda-Filloy JA, Llorca J. Insulin
resistance in rheumatoid arthritis: the impact of the anti-
TNF-alpha therapy. Ann NY Acad Sci 2010; 1193: 153-159.
146. Tay C, Liu YH, Hosseini H, et al. B-cell-specific depletion
of tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibits atherosclerosis
development and plaque vulnerability to rupture by
reducing cell death and inflammation. Cardiovasc Res
2016; 111: 385-397.
147. Pina T, Armesto S, Lopez-Mejias R, et al. Anti-TNF-alpha
therapy improves insulin sensitivity in non-diabetic
patients with psoriasis: a 6-month prospective study. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 2015; 29: 1325-1330.
148. Martinez-Abundis E, Reynoso-von Drateln C, Hernandez-
Salazar E, Gonzalez-Ortiz M. Effect of etanercept on
insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in a randomized
trial with psoriatic patients at risk for developing type 2
diabetes mellitus. Arch Dermatol Res 2007; 299: 461-465.
149. Dominguez H, Storgaard H, Rask-Madsen C, et al.
Metabolic and vascular effects of tumor necrosis factor-
alpha blockade with etanercept in obese patients with type
2 diabetes. J Vasc Res 2005; 42: 517-525.
150. Kothari V, Galdo JA, Mathews ST. Hypoglycemic agents
and potential anti-inflammatory activity. J Inflamm Res
2016; 9: 27-38.
151. Scheen AJ, Esser N, Paquot N. Antidiabetic agents:
potential anti-inflammatory activity beyond glucose
control. Diabetes Metab 2015; 41: 183-194.
152. Takada S, Masaki Y, Kinugawa S, et al. Dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 inhibitor improved exercise capacity and
mitochondrial biogenesis in mice with heart failure via
activation of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor signalling.
Cardiovasc Res 2016; 111: 338-347.
153. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes.
New Engl J Med 2015; 373: 2117-2128.
154. Shigiyama F, Kumashiro N, Miyagi M, et al. Effectiveness
of dapagliflozin on vascular endothelial function and
glycemic control in patients with early-stage type 2
diabetes mellitus: DEFENCE study. Cardiovasc Diabetol
2017; 16: 84. doi: 10.1186/s12933-017-0564-0
155. Li FF, Gao G, Li Q, et al. Influence of dapagliflozin on
glycemic variations in patients with newly diagnosed type
2 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Res 2016; 2016: 5347262.
doi:10.1155/2016/5347262
156. Chin KL, Ofori-Asenso R, Hopper I, et al. Potential
mechanisms underlying the cardiovascular benefits of
sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors: a systematic
review of data from preclinical studies. Cardiovasc Res
2019; 115: 266-276.
157. Lim S, Lee GY, Park HS, et al. Attenuation of carotid
neointimal formation after direct delivery of a recombinant
adenovirus expressing glucagon-like peptide-1 in diabetic
rats. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 183-194.
158. Wu JH, Li Y, Zhou YF, et al. Semaphorin-3E attenuates
neointimal formation via suppressing VSMCs migration
and proliferation. Cardiovasc Res 2017; 113: 1763-1775.
159. Drucker DJ, Nauck MA. The incretin system: glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor agonists and dipeptidyl peptidase-4
inhibitors in type 2 diabetes. Lancet 2006; 368: 1696-1705.
160. Ma T, Du X, Pick JE, Sui G, Brownlee M, Klann E.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 cleavage product GLP-1(9-36)
822

amide rescues synaptic plasticity and memory deficits in
Alzheimer’s disease model mice. J Neurosci 2012; 32:
13701-13708.
161. Giacco F, Du X, Carratu A, et al. GLP-1 cleavage product
reverses persistent ROS generation after transient
hyperglycemia by disrupting an ROS-generating feedback
loop. Diabetes 2015; 64: 3273-3284.
162. Feaver Ryan E, Rekhter M, Walton S, et al. Abstract 310:
GLP-1 cleavage product (9-36)-NH2 exerts pro-survival
effects on smooth muscle cells in advanced inflammatory
hemodynamic conditions. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2013; 33 (Suppl. 1): A310.
163. Kujawska-Luczak M, Szulinska M, Skrypnik D, et al. The
influence of orlistat, metformin and diet on serum levels of
insulin-like growth factor-1 in obeses women with and
without insulin resistance. J Physiol Pharmacol 2018; 69:
737-745.
164. Isoda K, Young JL, Zirlik A, et al. Metformin inhibits
proinflammatory responses and nuclear factor-kappaB in
human vascular wall cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2006; 26: 611-617.
165. Pradhan AD, Everett BM, Cook NR, Rifai N, Ridker PM.
Effects of initiating insulin and metformin on glycemic
control and inflammatory biomarkers among patients with
type 2 diabetes: the LANCET randomized trial. JAMA
2009; 302: 1186-1194.
166. Haffner S, Temprosa M, Crandall J, et al. Intensive lifestyle
intervention or metformin on inflammation and coagulation
in participants with impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes
2005; 54: 1566-1572.
167. Goldberg RB, Temprosa MG, Mather KJ, Orchard TJ,
Kitabchi AE, Watson KE. Lifestyle and metformin
interventions have a durable effect to lower CRP and tPA
levels in the diabetes prevention program except in those
who develop diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014; 37: 2253-2260.
168. Krysiak R, Okopien B. Lymphocyte-suppressing and
systemic anti-inflammatory effects of high-dose metformin
in simvastatin-treated patients with impaired fasting
glucose. Atherosclerosis 2012; 225: 403-407.
169. Harsch IA, Kaestner RH, Konturek PC. Hypoglycemic side
effects of sulfonylureas and repaglinide in ageing patients -
knowledge and self-management. J Physiol Pharmacol
2018; 69: 647-645.
170. Cui W, Zhang S, Cai Z, et al. The antidiabetic agent
glibenclamide protects airway hyperresponsiveness and
inflammation in mice. Inflammation 2015; 38: 835-845.
171. Kewcharoenwong C, Rinchai D, Utispan K, et al.
Glibenclamide 
reduces 
pro-inflammatory 
cytokine
production by neutrophils of diabetes patients in response to
bacterial infection. Sci Rep 2013; 3: doi: 10.1038/srep03363
172. Mavridis G, Souliou E, Diza E, et al. Inflammatory
cytokines in insulin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes.
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2008; 18: 471-476.
173. Ling MY, Ma ZY, Wang YY, et al. Up-regulated ATP-
sensitive potassium channels play a role in increased
inflammation and plaque vulnerability in macrophages.
Atherosclerosis 2013; 226: 348-355.
174. Zhang G, Lin X, Zhang S, Xiu H, Pan C, Cui W. A
protective role of glibenclamide in inflammation-
associated injury. Mediators Inflamm
2017; 2017:
3578702. doi: 10.1155/2017/3578702
175. Krishnan SM, Ling YH, Huuskes BM, et al. Pharmacological
inhibition of the NLRP3 inflammasome reduces blood
pressure, renal damage, and dysfunction in salt-sensitive
hypertension. Cardiovasc Res 2019; 115: 776-787.
176. Yamazaki M, Hasegawa G, Majima S, et al. Effect of
repaglinide versus glimepiride on daily blood glucose
variability and changes in blood inflammatory and
oxidative stress markers. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2014; 6:
54. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-6-54
177. Kurowska P, Chmielinska J, Ptak A, Rak A. Expression of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors is regulated by
gonadotropins and steroid hormones in in vitro porcine
ovarian follicles. J Physiol Pharmacol 2017; 68: 823-832.
178. Ialenti A, Grassia G, Di Meglio P, Maffia P, Di Rosa M,
Ianaro A. Mechanism of the anti-inflammatory effect of
thiazolidinediones: relationship with the glucocorticoid
pathway. Mol Pharmacol 2005; 67: 1620-1628.
179. Kvandova M, Barancik M, Balis P, Puzserova A,
Majzunova M, Dovinova I. The peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma agonist pioglitazone improves
nitric oxide availability, renin-angiotensin system and
aberrant redox regulation in the kidney of pre-hypertensive
rats. J Physiol Pharmacol 2018; 69: 231-243.
180. Marfella R, D’Amico M, Esposito K, et al. The ubiquitin-
proteasome system and inflammatory activity in diabetic
atherosclerotic plaques: effects of rosiglitazone treatment.
Diabetes 2006; 55: 622-632.
181. van de Laar FA. Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors in the early
treatment of type 2 diabetes. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2008;
4: 1189-1195.
182. Emoto T, Sawada T, Hashimoto M, et al. Effect of 3-month
repeated administration of miglitol on vascular endothelial
function in patients with diabetes mellitus and coronary
artery disease. Am J Cardiol 2012; 109: 42-46.
183. Bertero E, Prates Roma L, Ameri P, Maack C. Cardiac
effects of SGLT2 inhibitors: the sodium hypothesis.
Cardiovasc Res 2018; 114: 12-18.
184. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin
and progression of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes. N Engl
J Med 2016; 375: 323-334.
185. Tanaka A, Shimabukuro M, Okada Y, et al. Rationale and
design of a multicenter placebo-controlled double-blind
randomized trial to evaluate the effect of empagliflozin on
endothelial function: the EMBLEM trial. Cardiovasc
Diabetol 2017; 16: 48. doi: 10.1186/s12933-017-0532-8
186. Lee YS, Park MS, Choung JS, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-
1 inhibits adipose tissue macrophage infiltration and
inflammation in an obese mouse model of diabetes.
Diabetologia 2012; 55: 2456-2468.
187. Varanasi A, Patel P, Makdissi A, Dhindsa S, Chaudhuri A,
Dandona P. Clinical use of liraglutide in type 2 diabetes and
its effects on cardiovascular risk factors. Endocr Pract
2012; 18: 140-145.
188. Chiquette E, Toth PP, Ramirez G, Cobble M, Chilton R.
Treatment with exenatide once weekly or twice daily for 30
weeks is associated with changes in several cardiovascular
risk markers. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2012; 8: 621-629.
189. Koppaka S, Kehlenbrink S, Carey M, et al. Reduced
adipose tissue macrophage content is associated with
improved insulin sensitivity in thiazolidinedione-treated
diabetic humans. Diabetes 2013; 62: 1843-1854.
190. Esterson YB, Zhang K, Koppaka S, et al. Insulin
sensitizing 
and 
anti-inflammatory 
effects 
of
thiazolidinediones are heightened in obese patients. 
J Investig Med 2013; 61: 1152-1160.
191. Kodama N, Tahara N, Tahara A, et al. Effects of
pioglitazone on visceral fat metabolic activity in impaired
glucose tolerance or type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2013; 98: 4438-4445.
192. Nitta Y, Tahara N, Tahara A, et al. Pioglitazone decreases
coronary artery inflammation in impaired glucose tolerance
and diabetes mellitus: evaluation by FDG-PET/CT
imaging. JACC Cardiovasc Imag 2013; 6: 1172-1182.
823

193. Assaloni R, Da Ros R, Quagliaro L, et al. Effects of
S21403 (mitiglinide) on postprandial generation of
oxidative stress and inflammation in type 2 diabetic
patients. Diabetologia 2005; 48: 1919-1924.
194. Makdissi A, Ghanim H, Vora M, et al. Sitagliptin exerts an
antinflammatory action. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012; 97:
3333-3341.
195. Tremblay AJ, Lamarche B, Deacon CF, Weisnagel SJ,
Couture P. Effects of sitagliptin therapy on markers of low-
grade inflammation and cell adhesion molecules in patients
with type 2 diabetes. Metabolism 2014; 63: 1141-1148.
196. Matsubara J, Sugiyama S, Akiyama E, et al. Dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 inhibitor, sitagliptin, improves endothelial
dysfunction in association with its anti-inflammatory
effects in patients with coronary artery disease and
uncontrolled diabetes. Circ J 2013; 77: 1337-1344.
197. Nakamura Y, Tsuji M, Hasegawa H, et al. Anti-
inflammatory effects of linagliptin in hemodialysis patients
with diabetes. Hemodial Int 2014; 18: 433-442.
Received: November 15, 2019
A ccepted: December 30, 2019
Author’s address: Dr. Tomasz P. Mikolajczyk, Department
of Internal and Agricultural Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Jagiellonian University Medical College, 1 Skarbowa Street, 31-
121 Cracow, Poland.
E-mail: tomaszp.mikolajczyk@uj.edu.pl
824
