Part II
Coffee Quality
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

         
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

337
 
Coffee: Production, Quality and Chemistry
Edited by Adriana Farah
© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
13.1  Introduction – Overview of Cupping
Tasting is natural for almost everyone. We do it every time we eat, and we 
have been deciding if we like or don't like a food for as long as most of us 
can remember. Those of us who have been drinking coffee for years have 
had great, mediocre and awful cups of coffee—and judged them as such. 
‘Cupping’ coffee should certainly be what we've been doing for years anyway, 
shouldn't it? However, when many people observe a formal cupping for the 
first time, it seems anything but normal tasting. It appears to be an elabo-
rate, numinous activity of slurping and spitting that culminates in a flurry of 
terms radiating poetically from the cupper's still-damp lips.
In reality, cupping is a specialization in the field of sensory analysis, and 
professional cuppers are trained panelists calibrated for the unique chal-
lenges of coffee. Evaluating food products professionally takes numerous 
hours of practice to achieve proficiency. The cupper is an instrument for 
sensory testing that can be trained, but may vary in capacity, depending on 
genetics, health, environment and life experiences that may have impacted 
the person's sensory systems both physically and psychologically. In other 
Chapter 13
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of 
Green Coffee Quality
Ildi Revi*
Ally Coffee and Purity Coffee, 1801 Rutherford Road, Greenville, South  
Carolina 29609, USA
*E-mail: ildi.revi@gmail.com
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
338
words, some people have more capacity to cup than others. One of the 
important attributes of good cuppers is that they can focus intensely on their 
own senses, shutting out the rest of the world, quickly identifying and cat-
egorizing their experiences, then promptly articulating their discoveries in 
a discussion with others, who may or may not have experienced the same 
things, and then finally putting all the information together and agreeing on 
a numerical score (range) for the coffee.
Coffee has layers of complexity with aromas, tastes and textures that 
manifest from obvious to barely detectible, both pleasant and unpleasant. 
Preparation of coffee involves dozens of choices for the many variables that 
impact how the final brew tastes and smells. To approach the convolution of 
humans evaluating this complex food product objectively requires planning, 
tools, discipline, skills, knowledge and collaboration with others.
13.1.1  What is ‘Coffee Cupping’?
‘Coffee cupping’ is the term used for the olfactory and gustatory evaluation 
of various qualities of a coffee, although professional cuppers may assess the 
coffee more broadly. In addition to taste and smell, some cuppers may also 
use their other senses before and during the coffee evaluation process, such 
as visual appraisals of the green (unroasted) beans, auditory cues made by 
the coffee in the sample roaster and tactile sensations of mouthfeel or ‘body’ 
of the coffee.
‘Coffee tasting’ and ‘coffee cupping’ are often used synonymously. The 
industry has begun to make a distinction between the two, although the defi-
nitions have not been adopted in any formal way.1 This chapter will use the 
following distinctions:
   
●●‘Coffee tasting’ refers to the evaluation of coffee brewed by various 
methods for various purposes. A coffee taster may be called upon to 
judge espresso, batch-brewed coffee, manual pour-overs, coffee made 
in an ibrik, coffee brewed in home brewers, single-serve coffees and 
others. Often coffee tasters assess the brewing and offer solutions to 
problems or suggestions for optimizing the coffee flavor, and they 
have a base knowledge of cupping, roasting and brewing technology. 
Coffee tasters can be found in cupping rooms, quality control or prod-
uct development labs, retail operations, training centers, competi-
tion spaces and other arenas where broad knowledge of coffee meets 
trained tasting ability. ‘Coffee tasters contribute to an organization's 
buying program, establish quality control protocols, and define and 
protect a coffee program—building its reputation and maintaining its 
integrity.’1
●●‘Coffee cupping’ refers to the practice of evaluating coffee using spe-
cific protocols of water poured over ground coffee into a set number of 
cups per sample, eliminating as many variables (grind size, time, tem-
perature or technique) as possible. Primarily, the practice of cupping 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

339
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
is used to determine the quality of a coffee sample being considered 
for sale or purchase. This practice is often referred to as ‘cupping for 
green coffee quality’, or ‘green coffee cupping’, which is a misnomer, 
because the coffee actually is roasted to specific standards—it is not 
cupped ‘green’. In some coffee-producing countries, particularly Afri-
can origins, ‘cupping’ is referred to as ‘liquoring’, which may be a more 
accurate term, although ‘cupping’ has supplanted it over the past few 
decades. The definition of ‘to liquor’ is ‘to steep’, and further, ‘to steep’ 
is ‘to soak in liquid in order to extract a given property.’2 In addition 
to cupping for green coffee quality, many companies practice produc-
tion cupping, where the cuppers evaluate the roasted coffee that will 
be released for sale to consumers. Classifying and categorizing a cof-
fee's tastes can help in decisions for blending or replacements, when a 
specific coffee is unavailable or too different from one crop year to the 
next for product consistency. Group work builds an evaluation team: 
‘Production cupping every roast creates a solid feedback loop that 
includes everyone in the process and builds excitement and shared 
responsibility.’3
●●Coffee tasters may also be coffee cuppers, and vice versa, but ‘cuppers’ 
in this chapter will be used specifically to refer to those who are evalu-
ating green coffee quality. That said, cupping methods may be used for 
evaluating roast level as well, but roasting outcomes are too numerous 
to address in this chapter.
●●This chapter explains ‘cupping’ rather than ‘coffee tasting’, because 
cupping has a more mutually accepted methodology than coffee tast-
ing, which is too broad. Cupping focuses squarely on the coffee itself, 
and from sample to sample the only variable that theoretically changes 
is the green coffee sample. Coffee tasting would involve discussing doz-
ens of purposes, methods and processes and the rationale for each of 
them, and none are standardized.
   
Cupping for green coffee quality is intended to be repeatable and as objec-
tive as possible. Cuppers must train themselves to be impartial, use their 
anatomy and physiology of taste and smell as instruments, eliminate factors 
that produce bias, understand the limitations of their biology and psychol-
ogy and employ the lexicon used by others in the coffee industry through 
collaborative cupping sessions. Striving for unbiased analysis is the best way 
in which trading partners can agree on selling price and acceptability, and 
self-monitoring partiality is an effective skill for cuppers to develop.
13.1.2  Why Does the Coffee Industry Cup?
Primarily, cuppers evaluate a coffee for its intrinsic quality, which will impact 
price discovery and purchase decisions. Cupping for green coffee quality 
must be performed consistently, not only for cuppers to build a repertoire 
of equivalent experiences from which they can make sound judgements, but 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
340
also to create a platform for those in the chain of coffee custody to communi-
cate reliably. In one of the classic historic texts on coffee, Modern Coffee Pro-
duction, author A.E. Haarer wrote, ‘Liquoring is a profession that safeguards 
the buyers and assists producers because a coffee which otherwise looks first 
class may be found to carry a taint which loses price and makes it of little use 
for blending with other high quality coffees.’4
The world benchmark for arabica coffee pricing is the ‘Coffee C Contract’ 
by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE). The Coffee C Contract sets the 
price on physical delivery of exchange-grade green beans, from one of 20 
countries of origin in a licensed warehouse to one of several ports in the US 
and Europe.5 A Notice of Certification is issued based on testing the grade 
of the beans and by cup testing for flavor. The ICE uses certain coffees to 
establish the ‘basis’, or basic commodity grade and trading price for fair 
to average quality coffee. The trading price fluctuates according to mar-
ket forces, and coffees judged better may receive a premium, while those 
judged inferior are at a discount.5 The only way to determine quality is by 
physical analysis and cupping, and that concept is what motivates cuppers 
to hone their skills.
With such a vast amount of international business riding on the Coffee 
C pricing, it would seem that cupping should have a global standard that 
everyone uses. Similarly, it is not always apparent, when reading scientific 
analyses or research on coffee, what methods for roasting, brewing or cup-
ping have been used. Roaster type, roast profile, water quality, temperature, 
steep time or grind size are not always divulged in the literature. Would 
it make sense for the coffee research community to use a standardized 
method?
Several coffee organizations in the world provide guidelines for cupping 
and some have their own standards and methods. The ICE's cupping method 
is not presented on its website, but the standards and cupping protocols of 
the Specialty Coffee Association (SCA) are published on their website. Many 
producers and exporters use the same cupping methods that have been 
handed down for decades by their predecessors with cuppers essentially 
learning as apprentices. Often importers and roasters develop their own cup-
ping systems that meet their organizational needs. With coffee's hundreds of 
compounds that are impacted by numerous variables of roasting and brew-
ing, how do buyers and sellers communicate effectively between each other 
from the opposite sides of the earth—or even within the same region—if 
they are using different procedures?
There is no universally employed standard for cupping coffee, but 
there is a generally used methodology. The International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO), a worldwide federation of national standards 
bodies, has a standard for sample preparation (ISO 6668) and a standard 
for coffee sensorial analysis vocabulary (ISO 18794:2018).4a The Specialty 
Coffee Association (SCA) has different (and more detailed) standards 
that are actively promoted through its programs and through the Coffee 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

341
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
Quality Institute (CQI). Many characteristics of most cupping methods 
are reflected in the system created by the SCA.6 In 2016 the Specialty Cof-
fee Association of America (SCAA) merged with the Specialty Coffee Asso-
ciation of Europe (SCAE) to form the Specialty Coffee Association (SCA). 
The standards of the former SCAA are referenced here as those of the 
‘SCA’. Originally the work of Ted Lingle, one of the founders of the SCAA, 
The Coffee Cupper's Handbook was the groundwork from which the SCA 
system began.7 Over the past 30 years, facilitated by the SCA, dozens of 
coffee importers, roasters and quality control professionals developed 
and refined standards, protocols and etiquette of cupping through col-
laboration and consensus.
In 1996 the SCAA founded the Coffee Quality Institute (CQI), which cre-
ated the Q Coffee System to introduce the concept of internationally accepted 
standards for quality, both cup and grade, particularly for the specialty cof-
fee trade.8 Their first focus was to help producers who had coffees that were 
on the borderline of ‘specialty grade’ to understand how to improve their 
coffees, and thus receive a higher price, and increase the supply of specialty 
grade coffee. They had to be able to explain, define, train and calibrate cup-
pers to ‘specialty grade’, so the method and protocol necessarily was refined 
and communicated over the years. CQI is now its own entity and has been 
instrumental in training and testing cuppers throughout the world on the 
SCA technical standards. Those who pass the rigorous exam, which consists 
of 19 tests, are called ‘Q Graders’. They have been promulgating their method 
throughout the world since the 1990s.8 As of this writing there are 19 coun-
tries as partners to the system with more than 4000 certified Q Graders from 
over 70 countries.
For ease of illustration and because it is a functional basis for arabica cof-
fee sample evaluation, this chapter presents and explains cupping through 
the lens of the SCA/CQI system. It is a starting point and used here because 
it has the most public presence at the time of the publication of this book. 
However, this book does not claim to speak for or represent the SCA or CQI, 
and anyone looking for official information should go directly to the source 
for the most current standards, which will be updated regularly as the SCA 
continues its collaborative work with industry professionals around the 
world.6 Also, please note that the SCA/CQI arabica coffee evaluation is dif-
ferent from that used for commercial-grade (the ICE) and for robusta coffee, 
which has different standards, ranking and attributes.
13.2  How to Cup Coffee
Cupping is a skill that develops over time if practiced often and regularly 
with other experienced, trained cuppers. One of the most important aspects 
of cupping is consistency, and the goal is that the only variable that should 
change from one cupping to the next is the coffee. By striving to achieve this 
consistency, the coffee is the highlight and focus of the cupping.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
342
Professional cuppers seek to eliminate subjectivity and maximize objectiv-
ity. They develop a routine and try to stick to it:
   
●●They use coffees sample-roasted to the same roast level for as close to 
the same number of minutes for every roast;
●●They ‘rest’ the coffee for the same amount of time after roasting;
●●They cup around the same time every day;
●●They use the same number of cups with the same coffee weight, grind 
the coffee to a set screen size, pour the water at the same degree of 
temperature, steep the coffee for the same amount of time, break the 
crust with the same stroke pattern and follow the same order during the 
evaluation;
●●They document their evaluations completely and file them methodically.
   
By systematizing their cupping routine, professional cuppers maximize 
their ability to achieve fluency in the coffee lexicon and build an internal 
catalogue of sensory experiences from which they can base descriptions and 
judgments.9 When a routine is consistently performed over time, if a slight 
difference appears, it is more pronounced and identifiable. This is a valuable 
aptitude, especially if the cupper's assessment influences the purchasing 
decisions for thousands of pounds of coffee.
13.2.1  Basic Cupping
The core of the actual cupping process begins with the sensory evaluation of 
the dry coffee in its cups and ends after the coffee has been prepared, tasted 
and cooled, and the senses have done their jobs. However, unless there are 
several people involved, the cupping process starts much sooner than that 
and ends after the cupping bowls are back in the cupboard. There are dozens 
of choices to make and tasks to perform before the cups land on the table 
ready for assessment, and these choices impact what the coffee cupper tastes 
and smells.
Here are the stages of cupping (explained in detail in the following pages):
   
	
1.	 Roast Samples: Roast the samples, but only cup them from 8 to 24 hours 
after roasting.
	
2.	 Prepare the Cupping Table: Organize the environment to be ready to cup 
uninterrupted, arrange the cupping supplies, weigh the coffee as whole 
bean into cups and check the water supply.
	
3.	 Cup the Coffees: Perform the cupping protocol with good etiquette. Eval-
uate each cup of the sample in the same order, and consider the com-
posite of all cups in the evaluation as a single coffee. Taste each sample 
at least three times at different temperatures to get a well-rounded 
understanding of the coffee's many qualities over time as it cools. Dis-
cuss evaluations with other cuppers to compare or align scoring and 
judgments.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

343
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
	4.	 Clean up: Dispose of the coffee grounds conscientiously, wash the cup-
ping supplies and table thoroughly and store the equipment and sup-
plies properly for the next cupping session.
	5.	 Document: Record cupping results into the database or other system 
and report results to relevant farmers, importers, exporters, customers 
or suppliers.
   
Each of the stages of cupping above involves the following:
   
●●Materials: Environment, equipment and supplies;
●●Skill: Performing the protocols and etiquette;
●●Knowledge: Cupping form terminology, scoring and lexicon;
●●Organization: Record keeping.
   
The details of these categories are described below.
13.2.2  Materials: Environment, Equipment and Supplies
13.2.2.1  Environment
Ideally, cupping is done in a designated area that allows the cupper to con-
centrate entirely on the coffee and sensory information. The cupping room 
should be quiet, clean, well lit, a comfortable temperature and with limited 
distractions. There should be no interfering aromas in the space, and any 
roasting or other activities should be done in a separate room, not while 
a cupping is taking place. Cuppers should be encouraged to focus their 
senses and minds only on the coffee and their assessments. Silence must be 
observed always in the cupping room to allow cuppers to internalize infor-
mation, reflect and remain free from bias.
The space should be big enough for cuppers to move around the cupping 
table with about a meter of space, to avoid interfering with each other or 
accidentally banging against the cupping tables. When deciding on cupping 
table designs, common sense, cuppers' specific physical characteristics, per-
sonal preference or organizational requirements should be considered. By 
SCA standard, cupping tables for six people must have a surface area of at 
least 10 square feet (0.93 m2).
13.2.2.2  Equipment and Supplies
The following equipment and supplies support consistent cupping based on 
the recommendations and standards of the SCA. The SCA has a certification 
program for cupping labs, and much of the below reflects the requirements 
of the certification, although for exact, current details, please visit the SCA 
website directly. Again, the purpose of introducing the SCA standards here 
is to provide a starting point and answer common questions that refer to 
variables and choices.
   
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
344
●●Sample Roaster:
   
The coffee sample roaster should be one manufactured specifically to roast 
and prepare small weight samples for evaluation and be able to manually 
adjust temperature to slow down or speed up the roast to meet target roast 
levels within 8 to 12 minutes (SCA standard). There should also be a way to 
visually observe the roast development. Of course, proper ventilation and a 
means of collecting chaff are also important, and the sample roaster must 
be cleaned and well maintained, so that any observed changes during roast-
ing are due to the bean and not the functionality of the equipment (among 
other reasons, not the least of which is safety from fires).
   
●●Roast color measuring device:
   
The roast level for cupping is measured between 30 minutes and 4 hours 
after roasting and ground for color measurement. The ground sample stan-
dard should meet a specific color, which has different scales, depending on 
the instrument doing the measuring (examples: Agtron Gourmet – 63.0; 
Colortrack – 62.0; ProbatColorette 3b – 96.0), with a tolerance of ±1.0 unit.6
Again, consistency is emphasized. The best way to train and reinforce learn-
ing is by achieving as close to the same roast level in as close to the same 
amount of time as possible for every coffee to be sampled over time. The 
standard is an attempt to quantify a point in roast development that max-
imizes the inherent aromatic compounds of the coffee, while completely 
avoiding compounds and aromatics from charring or over-roasting. Most 
people in the coffee industry understand that roast color can be deceptive 
when predicting flavor and aroma, but because we have so few widely acces-
sible objective or mechanical methods for measuring roasted coffee, this 
color standard will likely remain until a better indicator is developed.
   
●●Coffee Samples:
   
Coffee samples offered by importers may generally be between 150 and 
500 g. Only about 60–100 g of roasted coffee is needed for a cupping evalu-
ation, which means 80–150 g of coffee should be charged into the sample 
roaster to adjust for weight loss from the roasting process. The standard 
coffee sample for green grading using the SCA method is 350 g. Green 
coffee grading includes analyzing the coffee for several features (including 
defects), which can help a cupper learn more about a coffee or make a 
connection about what they might be tasting at the table. After the green 
coffee is graded, it is important to keep, store, record and file some of 
the green coffee for reference later. This is particularly important when 
evaluating a pre-shipment sample of coffee, because upon delivery of the 
coffee, having a well-kept offer or pre-shipment sample with which to 
compare the arrival sample will reveal the impact of storage and transport 
on the coffee. This is not only good practice to build the sensory repertoire 
for cupping, but also good business.
   
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

345
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
●●Grinder:
   
A well-maintained grinder with sharp burrs is recommended and should 
output within a 10% margin of difference from grind to grind using the 
same coffee. The standard reads, ‘The coffee used for cupping shall be 
ground so that 70–75 percent of the grinds pass through the 20 mesh 
sieve.’6 The sieves are the USA Standard or American Society for Testing 
Materials (ASTM) screen sizes, and ‘20’ represents 841 microns.11 The 
grinder must be able to achieve this.
   
●●Balance (Scale):
   
The scale should be able to measure from one coffee bean up to a ceramic 
cup tared, so the standard reads, ‘A scale capable of precision of 0.01 
grams and a capacity of 100–300 grams and that is ANSI certified to stan-
dard 169.’10
   
●●Cupping vessels with lids:
   
It is important that all cups are identical. Sensory analysts are aware of the 
importance of uniformity to avoid bias. The cups should also have lids to 
keep the fragrance of the grinds within the cup before evaluation. Cups 
should be tempered glass or ceramic and have volume of 207 ml–266 ml (7 
to 9 fluid ounces). The recommended diameter is between approximately 
76 mm and 89 mm (3 in. and 3.5 in.). When water is poured on the grounds, 
they rise and come together to form a crust on top of the coffee, which con-
tains hundreds of bubbles full of powerful aromatics. This crust should not 
auto-break, as it does when the cup is too wide, or the valuable aromatics 
will be lost to the cupper, who wants to break the crust purposefully.
One factor that differentiates one cupping method from another is the 
number of cups used per sample. Some companies use 2 or 3 cups, and 
some use 10. The SCA method uses 5 sample cups for statistical purposes, 
which we will not discuss in this chapter, but ultimately it helps evaluate 
sample uniformity and understand the possible extent of defects in a spe-
cific lot of coffee. Thus, using the SCA method, for each sample it is useful 
to have 6–7 cups: 5 cups for the coffee samples that will be cupped, and 
1 cup each for the ‘purge’ coffee and dip cup (explained later), although 
these last two cups can be different from the 5 identical evaluation cups.
   
●●Cupping spoons and spittoons:
   
The spoons should be of non-reactive metal, so as not to add any off fla-
vors to the coffee and must be able to take 4 to 5 ml of coffee sample. 
Spittoons can be of any material, but the best spittoons allow for discreet 
spitting and limit the possibility of spillage. Recently, chewing tobacco 
spittoons have become popular in cupping labs, and often importers have 
‘signature’ spittoons and spoons.
   
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
346
●●Water supply and hot water equipment:
   
The water used for cupping is critical and can impact the flavors of the cof-
fee in significant ways. Water used for cupping must be clean and odor free 
(no chlorine especially), but not distilled or softened. Usually, commercial 
spring water is acceptable, because ideal total dissolved solids (TDS) are 
between 125 and 175 ppm. If TDS is less than 100 ppm or more than 250 
ppm, the flavor of the coffee can be impacted. More detailed information 
on the water standard can be found at the SCA website.12
The kettles or hot water dispensers should be able to heat an adequate 
amount of water for the number of cups being evaluated at the same time. 
If water runs out while it is being poured into the 5 cups, the cupping is 
spoiled since consistent evaluation is no longer possible.
The water should be freshly drawn and approximately 93 °C (200 °F) at 
the time it is poured onto the ground coffee. It is important if cupping mul-
tiple samples on the same table that the cupper pours the water quickly and 
carefully, so that each cup of the sample is as close to the same temperature 
as possible. More information on pouring is presented in the protocol later.
   
●●A stopwatch, pencils, clipboards and cupping forms (or a mobile app)
   
Managing and monitoring time is an important aspect of cupping. Any type 
of stopwatch works and should be in plain view for the cuppers. Each cup-
per should have a couple of sharpened pencils with erasers, a clipboard and 
enough cupping forms for the samples on the table. Alternatively, there are 
several apps and electronic platforms available for recording cupping evalu-
ations.13 Although, having a smartphone or tablet at the cupping table may 
be awkward or impractical for some people and situations.
Once the materials and supplies are in order, a cupper has the tools needed 
to perform the cupping protocols fluidly and with good etiquette.
13.2.3  Skill: Performing the Protocols and Etiquette
Etiquette at the cupping table, like etiquette in any social system, has a col-
lection of rules that describe and direct behavior. Etiquette at the cupping 
table must provide a safe, comfortable and stress-free place for cuppers to 
evaluate the coffees accurately. Etiquette is not a set of strict rules, but rather 
guidelines that are common sense and promote politeness, fairness and con-
sideration for others.
Etiquette Prior to Cupping: Personal Habits
Cuppers should smell the coffee, not the people next to them. People in 
the cupping room should not introduce extra aromas, fragrances or odors. 
Primarily, a cupper should wear clean clothes and be free of body odors, 
but also should not have used aromatic soaps and shampoos immediately 
prior to cupping. No perfume, aftershave or scented deodorants should 
be worn in the cupping room, and there should be no smoking prior to 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

347
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
cupping: not only might the cupper's tasting ability be impacted, but also 
smoke is often easily detected on a cupper's clothing and breath and is 
off-putting to other cuppers. Similarly, breath mints, chewing gum, tooth-
paste and mouthwash will impact the cupper's taste and can be detected 
by people near them.
Although it is important to have a little food in the stomach before 
cupping, it is also important to be mindful of odorous foods and kitchen 
smells that both the cupper and others can detect. Also, avoid foods that 
linger on the tongue, like garlic, onions, peppers or curry. Finally, cuppers 
who are not well or feel an illness coming on should not cup with others 
and are expected to excuse themselves.
Etiquette During Cupping: Behaviors
Many cuppers find it is best to have had a good night's sleep and to cup 
within 2 to 3 hours of waking up. Cuppers should prepare all materials 
and supplies before the evaluation is ready to begin (Figure 13.1), because 
once the cupping starts, there should be no interruptions to the routine. 
Silence should be observed from the time the first coffee is ground until 
the end, and beyond silence, facial expressions and gestures should be 
avoided. Cuppers should actively focus their senses, take good notes and 
be consistent from coffee to coffee. Here are other common practices of 
good etiquette:
   
●●Use the dip cup after dipping the spoon in any cup of coffee every time.
●●Do not interrupt other cuppers when they are evaluating a set of cups—
stand back and allow them to evaluate on their own. Conversely, as soon 
as a cupper completes an evaluation of a set of cups, he or she should 
step away from the set to allow others to evaluate.
●●DO NOT put a spoon in cups that are under evaluation by another cup-
per, even for just a small taste.
●●Most cupping seems to progress from left to right, which means cup-
pers tend to move counter-clockwise around a table, although this is 
Figure 13.1  Cup numbering and setup.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
348
not a formal rule. As noted in the SCA lab standard, the meter of space 
between a cupping table and the wall and a 2 meter space between cup-
ping tables will help cuppers avoid bumping each other as they step 
back from and rotate around the table(s).
●●Evaluate each cup of the 5-cup sample in the same order, but also imag-
ine the composite of all 5 in the evaluation as a single cup coffee. The 
5-cup setup has numbers for the cups from left to right. These numbers 
are for identifying defects.
●●Once the cupping is complete, openly share findings and avoid reacting 
negatively or argumentatively to other cuppers' observations or scoring. 
Be mindful not to dominate the discussion, try not to be the first to talk 
always and do not force opinions on others. Balance this self-monitor-
ing with neutral feedback and instruction for less experienced cuppers 
who seek to align scoring with those in seniority.
   
The cupping room should be a safe zone for both the physical and psycho-
logical aspects of cupping, because sensory analysis involves both.
13.2.3.1  Cupping Protocol
Once all the equipment and supplies are in place, it is important to focus only 
on the coffee by carefully and consistently following the protocol with good 
etiquette. The cupping protocol is almost a choreography for allowing the 
cupper's perceptions of attributes to flow freely and be retained. The cupping 
routine should become naturalized so that all attention is on the senses and 
what they are telling the cupper about the coffee, and then recording obser-
vations. Without a record, it is unlikely the cupper will remember details of 
the coffee even the following day.
The cupper analyses the quality of specific flavor attributes and rates them 
on a numeric scale. Coffees that receive higher scores should be noticeably 
better than coffees that receive lower scores, and cuppers should add detailed 
notes that bolster the rationales for the scoring. The scores between samples 
can be compared, and once all the activity is complete, discussing the coffees 
is a valuable aspect of the cupping process.
The general steps of cupping are listed below and detailed in the following 
pages:
   
	
1.	 Roast the sample and let rest 8–24 hours.
	
2.	 Weigh coffee in individual cups as whole beans.
	
3.	 Grind each cup separately to accurate grind size, and set cups uniformly 
in place.
	
4.	 Evaluate the fragrance of the coffee (the smell of the dry grounds) 
within 15 minutes of grinding.
	
5.	 Pour water at 92.2–94.4 °C (200 °F ± 2 °F) over the grounds in all 5 cups 
in order.
	
6.	 Pour water into dip cups.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

349
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
	
7.	 Steep 3–5 minutes without disturbing cups: determine your target time 
limit for steeping and be consistent.
	
8.	 Break the crust of wet grounds and evaluate aroma (the smell of the wet 
grounds).
	
9.	 Skim the remaining surface bubbles and grounds.
	 10.	 Steep to a palatable temperature (±71 °C/160 °F).
	 11.	 Aspirate and taste; rinse, spit, document and repeat at least ‘three 
passes’ up until cooled to about room temperature ±21 °C (70 °F).
	 12.	 Complete documentation.
	 13.	 Discuss observations.
	 14.	 Clean and maintain equipment and supplies.
   
13.2.3.1.1  Sample Roasting.  Roast the sample within 24 hours of cupping 
as covered in Section 2.2.2. (Agtron 63, measured ground, etc.).6 Consistency 
in roasting is one of the hardest tasks to achieve, but the ideal outcome is 
that all the samples on a cupping table should be roasted to the same degree 
in the same way for green coffee evaluation. It is a useful way to compare one 
coffee to the next, or to evaluate a specific coffee over time to observe the 
sensory impact of its aging.
The sample-roasting standard states the roast should be completed in no 
less than 8 minutes and no more than 12 minutes. The sample should not 
be scorched or tipped, because that will impart flavors related to roasting, 
rather than flavors inherent in the beans. The sample should be immediately 
air-cooled (no water quenching) after roasting. When the sample reaches 
room temperature, it should be stored in an airtight container until cupping 
to minimize exposure to air and prevent contamination. Sample roasting 
should be done systematically, coding or labeling samples accurately and 
ensuring there is no mix-up or confusion.
13.2.3.1.2  Weighing.  Weigh the coffee as whole beans into each cup 
plus an extra amount in a ‘purge’ cup. If a defect is present, it is import-
ant to isolate it into a single cup, and then count the number of cups in 
the sample with that defect. If coffee was ground en masse and dished out 
into cups already ground, the defect would likely be spread throughout 
the sample and be less detectible, if at all. Coffee should be in the correct 
ratio to cup volume and consistent for every cup and sample. The stan-
dard states: ‘When cupping, the ratio of 8.25 grams (whole bean) coffee 
(±0.25 grams), to 150 ml (5.07 fluid ounces) water shall be used. When 
adjusting due to vessel size, a ratio of 1.63 grams (whole bean) coffee per 
1 fluid ounce of water (or 0.055 g coffee per 1 ml water) shall be used.’6 
Whatever weights and ratios are chosen should be consistent among all 
cups and samples.
13.2.3.1.3  Grinding.  Grind no more than 15 minutes prior to water con-
tact (30 minutes with lids). When the time comes to grind the coffee, first 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
350
‘season’ the grinder by sending the beans from the purge cup through the 
grinder and tapping out anything that got stuck in the chute. After purging, 
grind each of the 5 sample cups separately, tapping the grinder chute gently 
between cups to ensure all the original quantity of coffee gets into each cup. 
Place a cover on the cups immediately after grinding, since some coffees give 
off stronger fragrance (the dry aroma given off after grinding) than others 
do when ground. Fragrance is ephemeral. If a sample has sat for too long a 
time, the intensity and qualities of the fragrance no longer can be evaluated 
accurately. Once one sample is done, if preparing another one, repeat the 
purge step to flush the grinder with the new sample before grinding the new 
sample cups of the batch.
When all the samples are ground, they should be placed uniformly on the 
table without any out of place, clearly demarcated with a dip cup nearby (Fig-
ure 13.2). Individuals should be assigned their spittoons and spoons, which 
are best to mark with names or other identifiers. Cuppers should keep track 
of their own materials and keep them close at hand, not placing them on the 
actual cupping table. The goal is that the space is uncluttered, and samples 
are presented identically.
Some companies, exporters and importers like their cupping tables to 
have a small tray of the green coffee sample and/or the roasted whole bean 
sample next to the cups. This helps cuppers make connections between what 
they are experiencing and different states of the coffee.
13.2.3.1.4  Evaluating Fragrance.  Evaluate the fragrance of the dry coffee 
from 0–15 minutes after grinding, sniffing the dry grounds lightly. Using 
good etiquette, cuppers do not pick up, shake and slap the cups to release 
fragrance, because that renders aromatics lost to other cuppers. Ask cuppers 
Figure 13.2  Cupping table setup diagram – example.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

351
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
for verbal confirmation that they have completed their fragrance evaluations 
before pouring the water.
13.2.3.1.5  Pouring.  Pour SCA Standard (125–175 ppm TDS) water at 93.33 
°C (200 °F) directly onto the grounds to the rim of the cup (Figure 13.3 and 
13.4), making sure to wet all the grounds. Pour all the cups of the same sam-
ple quickly, carefully, uniformly and to the same volume without spilling or 
running out of water mid-cup or mid-sample.
In other words, all 5 cups must be filled completely at once with as little 
lag time between cups as practically possible. Because fresh roasted coffee 
‘blooms’ with gases, when water is poured on the grounds, be mindful not to 
fill the cup to the brim, because the blooming grounds can spill out, yet it is 
Figure 13.3  Pouring at the same time as much as possible. Photo courtesy Ally 
Coffee, South Carolina, by Alice Boswell Brown.
Figure 13.4  Pouring to the brim. Photo courtesy of Ally Coffee, South Carolina, by 
Alice Boswell Brown.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
352
useful to fill to as close to the brim as possible. Practice and experience are 
valuable in this action.
13.2.3.1.6  Filling Dip Cups.  Pour hot water into dip cups after all sample 
cups have been filled. During the cupping, if the dip cups become too concen-
trated with coffee or begin to appear unappetizing, they should be replaced. 
It is common to place a paper towel next to the dip cup to blot excess water 
after dipping, thus avoiding adulterating cups with dip cup water.
13.2.3.1.7  Steeping.  Determine your target time and be consistent. Let 
the coffee steep unbroken for 3–5 minutes before evaluation (Figure 13.5). 
This is the standard range of time, but consistency dictates picking a specific 
steep time and repeating it. It is an ideal, because to coordinate breaking 
five crusts per sample at the same steep time and evaluating each aromatic 
release is not practically possible. Cuppers may go around the table and eval-
uate what they can of the aroma at this point, being careful not to disturb 
the cups.
13.2.3.1.8  Breaking the Crust.  Break the crust of grounds with three dis-
tinct rotating or swiping motions without stirring too much, and sniff the 
foam that runs down the back of the spoon after stirring. Evaluate aroma by 
getting as close to the crust as possible and sniffing while breaking without 
putting your nose into the grounds (Figure 13.6).
If more than one cupper is present, it is useful to agree on a specific cup 
number to break the crust. If more than one sample is on the table, each cup-
per can break the same cup number for each sample. Because there are five 
cups to each sample, up to five individuals get the opportunity to evaluate 
the aroma from the break, which contains the most valuable aromatics of the 
wet grounds. If more than five people are at the table, as they rotate from one 
sample to the next, they can break the crust of the next cup in order, but, of 
course, they will miss out on some.
Figure 13.5  Crust with bubbles containing aroma compounds before ‘breaking’. 
Photo courtesy of Ally Coffee, South Carolina, by Alice Boswell Brown.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

353
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
13.2.3.1.9  Skimming.  Skim the surface bubbles and surface grounds 
without agitating the cup or unsettling the grounds (Figure 13.7), dipping 
the spoon(s) in water between each cup. Many cuppers use two spoons to 
clean the foamy remnants of the broken crust that may still be present. The 
skimmed residue is usually discarded into a spittoon.
13.2.3.1.10  Steeping (Continued).  Before the first taste, the protocol rec-
ommends the cupper allows the coffee to cool to ±71 °C (160 °F). This rec-
ommendation is for the cupper to avoid burning the tongue, mouth or lips 
on hot coffee. Once the tongue is burnt, the cupping day has ended, since 
blistered parts of the tongue will prevent accurate tasting ability.
13.2.3.1.11  Tasting.  Aspirate and taste; rinse, spit, document and 
repeat until cooled to 21 °C (70 °F). Cuppers often mention ‘three passes’, 
which refer to sampling the coffee three times at different temperatures. 
Figure 13.6  Get as close to the cup as possible without wetting your nose. Photo 
courtesy of Ally Coffee, South Carolina, by Alice Boswell Brown.
Figure 13.7  Skimming residue from cups. Photo courtesy of Ally Coffee, South 
Carolina, by Alice Boswell Brown.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
354
Characteristics of the coffee present themselves in different ways as the 
coffee cools. When at the hottest point (71 °C), flavor and aftertaste pres-
ent maximum intensity, then change as the coffee cools. Acidity, body and 
balance also change over time and are considered evaluated optimally 
between 60 and 71 °C (140–160 °F). Aspirating (slurping) is important to 
break up the mass of the liquid into tiny droplets to be more accessible to 
the olfactory receptors in the nasal cavity and disperse the liquid through-
out the mouth. Because in some cultures slurping is considered rude, aspi-
rating coffee can be an awkward skill to master both psychologically and 
sometimes even physically for some people. Similarly, spitting after each 
slurp can be awkward, although it is an important part of the process for 
both sensory and physical reasons.
The senses are interacting at this point, and the cupper's task is to decon-
struct or analyze the experience as much as possible, then articulate it to 
share with others. This is the crucial point in the cupping where silence must 
be observed and there should be no distractions, because the slightest dis-
turbance can cause a cupper on the cusp of identifying something to lose it 
entirely.
13.2.3.1.12  Documenting.  Record as much as possible on the cupping 
forms. This practice will provide numerous benefits, both personal and pro-
fessional. Try to write as much as possible about a coffee and anything of 
note during the cupping.
13.2.3.1.13  Cleaning up.  Clean and maintain equipment and supplies to 
ensure that every cupping is uniform. Cuppers should not leave their spit-
toons for others to manage and should dispose of their own spittoon waste. 
Washing tabletops free of dry spilled coffee is as important as washing the 
cups themselves, and any soap used on the tables, cups and spoons should 
be fragrance-free and thoroughly rinsed off. After a sanitizing wash, cups, 
spoons and spittoons should be air dried before being put away.
13.2.4  Knowledge: Cupping Form Terminology, Scoring and 
Lexicon
Cupping is combining sensory analysis with judgement and recording infor-
mation. A cupping form creates a common format or structure for analyzing 
coffee, which is important for communication. Any form that is used will 
require instruction on how to complete it. Numerical scales need to be clearly 
explained with experiential examples and a calibrated cupper to explain the 
scoring rationale. The goal is to align their scores, so that the communica-
tion is meaningful. Calibrated cuppers' analysis of a coffee should be within 
a narrow degree of discrepancy from other trained cuppers or a designated 
lead cupper.
There are several choices for standardized forms. The SCA has a stan-
dard paper-based form available from their website. The Alliance for Coffee 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

355
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
Excellence, which runs the Cup of Excellence competition in producing 
countries, also has a cupping form downloadable from its website.14 In 
addition, many companies develop forms that meet their specific needs. 
For consistency of example, this chapter will use the SCA form. The job of 
a cupper is to identify and record clear, comprehensive descriptors on the 
form as they analyze each category. In addition, they must detect, identify 
and score defects accurately.
13.2.4.1  Cupping Form Terminology
The language of sensory analysis is difficult to explain by book alone. The 
best way to develop connections between the language of flavor and its 
meaning is to cup with experienced, professional cuppers.
The following criteria are commonly used when evaluating coffee and thus 
on the SCA form:7
   
Fragrance and aroma: Fragrance is the smell of the dry ground coffee, and 
aroma is the smell when the grounds are wet. A cupper identifies fra-
grances and aromas and determines the intensity of them as well.
Flavor: The combination of impressions of taste and smell makes up fla-
vor. The five basic tastes generally used to evaluate specialty coffee are 
sweet, sour, salt, bitter and umami. There are a multitude of smells. Flavor 
represents main attributes and complexity of a coffee's character, when it 
is slurped strongly.
Aftertaste: After all the coffee is out of the mouth, the ‘finish’ that remains 
on the tongue and sometimes even in the nasal cavity is referred to as 
aftertaste.
Acidity: The sensation and taste of a lemon or vinegar is an example of 
acidity, which also has intensity. It is referred to as ‘bright’ or ‘lively’ when 
it is pleasant and considered ‘sour’ when overpowering or unpleasant.
Body: The thickness and feel of the coffee in the mouth is the body, or 
‘mouthfeel’. A common example of body is non-fat milk, versus partial fat 
milk, versus full cream milk. The intensity of body is also evaluated.
Balance: The way all aspects of the coffee interact with each other makes 
up the balance. For example: if a coffee does not have enough acidity or 
has an overpowering flavor, it would receive a lower score on balance.
Sweetness: The detection of sugars in the coffee is sweetness.
   
The SCA form measures ‘clean cup’ and ‘uniformity’ as well and allows the 
cupper an ‘overall’ judgment. These are explained further in the next section.
13.2.4.2  Scoring
The subject of assessment, judgement and scoring for sensory analysis is 
too vast to discuss in this chapter. Cuppers debate questions about subjec-
tivity versus objectivity regularly. Ultimately, it is up to the cupper to use 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
356
descriptive language from a set lexicon and be as non-judgmental in scoring 
as is humanly possible (which is the heart of the debate). We score coffees 
because assigning a numeric value to sensory attributes of the coffee allows 
us to compare coffees, communicate evaluations to others and remind us of 
our assessments at later dates outside the cupping room.
Many cupping forms use a scale of 1–10, and, in theory, the SCA scale 
ranges from a minimum value of 0 to a maximum value of 10 points. The 
lower end of the scale is below specialty grade. On the SCA form ‘good’ starts 
at 6.0, 7.0 is ‘very good’, 8.0 is ‘excellent’ and 9.0 is ‘outstanding’. Only quar-
ter points are used as fractions (Table 13.1).
When all the category scores are added together, and any defects are 
deducted, coffees at 80 points and above are classified as ‘specialty’. His-
torically, the Exchange uses certain coffees to establish the ‘basis’, or a 
reference point for scoring, although it is difficult to nail down exactly 
what that number is on the SCA form. One way to demystify the SCA cup-
ping form is to calibrate with Certified Q Arabica Graders, who are trained 
with tightly calibrated instructors and are tested on scoring. Another way 
to learn a scale is to cup with experienced cuppers who regularly evalu-
ate both commodity and specialty grades, and afterward discuss notes 
and scores. Prior to the first time cupping together, cuppers might do an 
alignment round of one or more samples, then try to come to consensus 
on the scores for each of the categories. Once they begin the full cup-
ping with several samples, they will refer to their scores on the alignment 
round to guide their decisions. This is referred to as ‘peer calibration’ or 
‘peer alignment’.
13.2.4.2.1  Evaluation Procedure.  Below are general guidelines for scor-
ing. The section that follows contains information on a lexicon for coffee 
that was released in 2016. On the SCA cupping form (Figure 13.8), intensity 
is marked on the small vertical scales within each category's box, and quality 
is numerically scored on the horizontal scales.
Roast color evaluation: Mark the cupping form with the roast level. If a 
color meter reading is available, note that, too.
Fragrance evaluation: Note the intensity of the dry coffee fragrance (low 
to high). Identify smells in the coffee and write them in the correspond-
ing space. Score according to calibration or alignment; otherwise use the 
quality scale at the top of the form.
Table 13.1  Quality scale.
Quality scale
6.00 – Good
7.00 – Very good
8.00 – Excellent
9.00 – Outstanding
6.25
7.25
8.25
9.25
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5
6.75
7.75
8.75
9.75
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

357
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
Aroma evaluation: When breaking the crust, get as close to the grounds as 
possible to experience the most aromatics of the coffee available as the bub-
bles burst. Note the intensity and mark the score. Because fragrance and 
aroma of the crust-breaking are gone at the beginning, it is appropriate to 
mark their combined score at the time of evaluation, even though aroma 
continues to present itself as the coffee continues to steep (Figure 13.8).
Allow the coffee to cool before proceeding to the next evaluation stage. 
Although mentioned before, it bears repeating: avoid burning your tongue.
Flavor, Aftertaste, Acidity, Body and Balance: When the sample has cooled 
to around 71 °C (160 °F), take a small amount of coffee to begin with and 
firmly aspirate (slurp) the liquor into the mouth, covering the tongue 
and upper palate. Make notes on flavor and aftertaste in corresponding 
spaces on the cupping form. The flavor score combines intensity, quality 
and complexity. For aftertaste, a long, positive flavor scores higher than a 
short or unpleasant experience. The evaluation should revisit each coffee 
through at least three passes as the cups cool, noting observations on the 
form. Acidity changes over time and should be scored with consideration 
of its intensity and characteristics in relation to the coffee's overall flavor 
profile. The score for body is usually higher for coffees that feel heavier 
in the mouth, although the score may be fairer using the intensity scale 
in conjunction with the quality rating in relation to the entire experience. 
The balance score should be based on how all the component categories 
of the coffee are blended and cooperate with each other. If some attributes 
overpower others, the cupper should score the balance lower.
Sweetness, Uniformity and Clean Cup: Once the brew cools to slightly above 
room temperature, check for the attributes of sweetness, uniformity and 
clean cup, marking 2 points per cup per category (10 points maximum 
score for each). That said, if cuppers detect a defect at any time during 
the session, they should identify and mark the box of the corresponding 
Figure 13.8  Cupping form category example from SCA official cupping form.1
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
358
defective cup on the form. Defects are classified as taints or faults, are 
unpleasant and lessen the likeability of the coffee. A taint is considered 
detectable and generally manifests in flavor and/or aftertaste—2 points 
are deducted per taint. A fault is objectionable and is obvious in aroma, 
flavor and/or aftertaste—4 points are deducted per fault. When calcu-
lating defects, multiply the number of cups by the number and type of 
defect, and subtract this from the total score. Boxes to specify number of 
cups and intensity (taint or fault) are on the form.
Overall Score: The cupping ends when the coffee has cooled to equilibrium 
with the room temperature. At this point the cupper reviews the entire 
process again and awards a judgment of ‘Overall Score’. Perhaps when 
they decided to put this category on the form they might have been think-
ing that ‘the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.’ This score usually 
is close to the mean of scores for other categories. However, when award-
ing these points, the cupper generally looks at the coffee in its entirety 
and judges whether the composite score up to that point is truly reflective 
of the overall impression they have of the coffee. They may score slightly 
higher or lower than the mean to bring the total score of the coffee more 
into line with their perception of the coffee.
Once this score is in place, the cupper adds all the scores together and 
fills in the Total Score. After filling in and calculating deductions for any 
defects, the cupper writes the Final Score in the lower right-hand box. This 
score determines the grade of the coffee, such as the 80-point minimum 
for ‘specialty grade’.
13.2.4.3  Lexicon
In 2016 World Coffee Research (WCR) published a new flavor lexicon for 
coffee, which was developed at the Sensory Analysis Center at Kansas State 
University.9 They embarked on the work to recognize the primary sensory 
qualities of coffee and to develop a reproducible method of measuring those 
qualities. ‘Flavor lexicons are a widely used tool for documenting and describ-
ing sensory perception of a selected food.’15 A lexicon is descriptive, quanti-
fiable and replicable, as developed by a trained panel of sensory analysts.15 
Each attribute in a lexicon is defined with words, referenced specifically and 
given an intensity score.
The panelists of the WCR Sensory Lexicon spent more than 100 hours 
evaluating 105 coffee samples from 13 countries to end up with 110 attri-
butes.17 As coffee cuppers around the world begin to use this lexicon, com-
munication and practice should advance the industry. The WCR website 
has a link to download the complete lexicon, which includes products, 
formulae and recipes to reproduce the representative aroma and/or flavor 
term and its intensity. In conjunction with their research, the SCA facil-
itated development of a new Coffee Taster's Flavor Wheel as a device to 
reference the lexicon. The wheel is a useful tool to have next to the cupping 
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

359
Coffee Cupping: Evaluation of Green Coffee Quality
table to nudge the mind when it gets stuck trying to find the word for what 
the senses are detecting.16
13.2.5  Organization: Record-keeping
A cupper or evaluation team usually maintains a database of outcomes of 
cupping sessions for several reasons. Primarily, record-keeping enables veri-
fication and determination of quality with notes, so that as time passes and 
many additional cupping sessions take place, the results of a given coffee are 
accessible for reference. Documentation helps a cupper make connections 
between what they are tasting and what might have impacted coffee flavor. 
There are several online and mobile tools available for cuppers, in addition 
to spreadsheets and manual methods for recording.
Some record-keeping systems also document as much information about 
the coffee as possible, such as origin, specifics about the farm and the coffee's 
growing conditions, processing and drying method, exporter, bag numbers, 
importer, dates (harvest, shipping and arrival) and other details. Additionally, 
observations during sample roasting, and, of course, the cupping evaluation 
itself, are attached to a coffee. After evaluation, professional cuppers give feed-
back to the person who supplied the coffee sample, generally within a few days.
13.3  Conclusion
Coffee cupping is sensory analysis of a complicated food product. The goal of 
cupping is to evaluate a coffee as impartially as possible and make decisions 
based on the results of the assessment. By consistently practicing a method 
of coffee evaluation, cuppers hone their skills. With new tools available to 
the industry, such as the WCR Lexicon and the corresponding Coffee Tast-
er's Flavor Wheel, being able to converse globally about cupping results may 
become more fluid. Many professional cuppers, whether they think about it 
daily or not, are gatekeepers who make judgments on behalf of consumers. 
Their evaluations may determine whether their company purchases a green 
coffee or not, which ultimately determines whether it lands in your morning 
cup or not.
References
	 1.	 Specialty Coffee Association of America, Specialty Coffee Association 
(SCA), SCA Education, http://SCAAeducation.org/pathways/coffee-taster/, 
last accessed February 2018.
	 2.	 Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company American Heritage® 
Dictionary of the English Language, 5th edn,2011.
	 3.	 B. A. Caspersen, Roast Magazine. A Well-rounded Palate: A Guide to the 
Coffee Taster's Flavour Wheel - Vol. May-June, 2012, vol. 43, p. 46.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online

Chapter 13
360
	 4.	 A. E. Haarer, Modern Coffee Production, 1956, 265–6, 467(a) International 
Organization for Standardization, ISO 6668: Green Coffee—Prepara-
tion of Samples for Use in Sensory Analysis (Food Products, CH-1211). 
Geneva, Switzerland: ISO; and International Organization for Standard-
ization. (2016). International Standard ISO 18794:2018—coffee—senso-
rial Analysis—Vocabulary, ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
	 5.	 Intercontinental Exchange, https://www.theice.com/products/15/ 
Coffee-C-Futures, last accessed February 2018.
	 6.	 Specialty Coffee Association of America (SCAA) Cupping Standards, 
https://sca.coffee/research/coffee-standards, last accessed March 2018.
	 7.	 T. R. Lingle, The Coffee Cupper's Handbook, 1985.
	 8.	 Coffee Quality Institute- Q Arabica Graders, http://database.coffeeinsti-
tute.org/users/graders/Arabica, last accessed February 2018.
	 9.	 World Coffee Research, Sensory Lexicon, https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/
media/documents/20170622_WCR_Sensory_Lexicon_2-0.pdf, last accessed 
February 2018.
	10.	 Specialty Coffee Association of America (SCAA) How to Become a SCAA 
Campus, http://scaaeducation.org/program-updates/campus-program­-
update/, last accessed February 2018.
	11.	 https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/chemistry/stockroom-reagents/learning-­
center/technical-library/particle-size-conversion.html, last accessed Feb-
ruary 2018.
	12.	 Specialty Coffee Association of America (SCAA) - Water Standard for 
Brewing Specialty Coffee, http://www.scaa.org/?page=resources&d=water-­
standards, last accessed February 2018.
	13.	 K. Stewart, Roast Magazine, Sept–Oct 2013. http://www.roastmagazine.
com/resources/Articles/Roast_SeptOct13_PointsOfTaste.pdf, last accessed 
September 2017.
	14.	 Alliance for Coffee Excellence, http://www.allianceforcoffeeexcellence.
org, last accessed September 2017.
	15.	 M. A. Drake and G. V. Civille, Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science 
and Food Safety, Institute of Food Technologists, Flavour Lexicons, 2002, 
33, 40.
	16.	 http://www.scaa.org/?page=resources&d=scaa-flavor-wheel, last accessed 
February 2018.
	17.	 M. Spencer, E. Sage, M. Velez and J.-X. Guinard, Using Single Free Sorting 
and Multivariate Exploratory Methods to Design a New Coffee Taster's 
Flavor Wheel, J. Food Sci., 2016, 81, S2997–S3005.
Published on 11 January 2019. Purchased by ildi.revi@gmail.com on 21 January 2019.
View Article Online
