Toxicol. Res.
Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 7-10 (2011)
DOI:10.5487/TR.2011.27.1.007
7
Possible Health Effects of Caffeinated Coffee Consumption on Alzheimer’s 
Disease and Cardiovascular Disease
Dong-Chul You1, Young-Soon Kim1, Ae-Wha Ha2, Yu-Na Lee1, Soo-Min Kim3,
Chun-Heum Kim4, Seung-Ha Lee1, Dalwoong Choi1 and Jae-Min Lee1
1College of Health Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-703
2Research Institute of Health Science, College of Health Science, Korea University, Seoul 136-703
3College of Natural Sciences, SangMyoung University, Seoul 110-743
4College of Medicine, InHa University, Incheon 402-751, Korea
(Received January 4, 2011; Revised January 19, 2011; Accepted January 25, 2011)
Coffee has been known to have both beneficial and harmful effects upon health. Coffee is one of the most
widely consumed beverages, worldwide. Dementia/Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and cardiovascular disease
(CVD) are public health problems that are rapidly increasing in the aging population. Due to the high con-
sumption of coffee, even small effects on an individual’s health could have a large effect on public health.
The aim of this review article is to provide an overview of previously published studies of coffee con-
sumption on health. Herein, we focus on epidemiological and experimental findings to investigate whether
coffee-drinking habits, and/or the quantity of coffee consumption, have any relationship to CVD, demen-
tia/AD, and other chronic diseases. Although the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood, when
comparing coffee drinkers with non-drinkers, moderate doses of caffeine showed protective effects against
CVD and AD. We hypothesized that caffeine may be a novel therapy to treat CVD and dementia/AD.
Key words: Caffeine, Cardiovascular disease, Dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, Coffee
INTRODUCTION
The coffee plant is an evergreen shrub that grows in tropi-
cal and subtropical regions throughout the world. After
about four years, coffee plants produce white blossoms and
the blossoms produce green coffee berries (Adriana, 2007).
It takes 6~9 months for coffee berries to ripen. When ripe,
the cherries (ripe coffee berries) are harvested by hand,
cleaned, fermented, and hulled, leaving the green coffee
beans. The green beans are then roasted (coffee beans),
blended, ground, and brewed (Sarah and Alan, 2003). The
coffee plant is a genus of the Rubiaceae family. The classi-
fication of the coffee plant is complicated, as there are
many species from which most commercial coffee is
obtained, including Coffea arabica and the Coffea cane-
phora (Robusta) (Mary et al., 2009). Caffeine (1,3,7-trime-
thylxanthine) is an alkaloid found in coffee beans, tea
leaves, and cocoa beans and other plants. It is similar in
structure to nucleosides and other xanthines found in vari-
ous natural sources (Fig. 1).
Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychoactive drug
in the world and most caffeine is consumed in the form of
coffee. The amount of caffeine in food items varies widely,
with coffee representing a major source of caffeine intake
(71~220 mg caffeine/150 ml). In tea, the caffeine content is
32~42 mg/150 ml and in cocoa the caffeine content is 4 mg/
150 ml. The caffeine content per cup also varies greatly,
depending upon the serving size (25~190 ml), the prepara-
tion method for making coffee (boiled, filtered, espresso, or
instant) and the type of coffee used (Arabica or Robusta)
(Neha et al., 2009). Depending upon the preparation method,
the caffeine content of a cup of coffee ranges from 0.6~
3.3 mg/ml for espresso, to 0.7~1.1 mg/ml for boiled or fil-
tered coffee and 0.2~1.0 mg/ml for instant coffee. The average
caffeine content in Robusta coffee is about twice as high as
the average caffeine content in Arabica coffee. Thus, the range
of caffeine content for Robusta coffee is 131~220 mg/
150 ml and the range of caffeine content for Arabica coffee
is 71~120 mg/150 ml (Nehlig, 1999).
The African word for the coffee plant is bun, which then
became the Arabica bun, meaning both the plant and the
berry. Rhazes (850-922 AD), a doctor who lived in Persian
Correspondence to: Jae-Min Lee, College of Health Sciences, Korea
University, Seoul 136-703, Korea
E-mail: ohenlee5960@hanmail.net
Perspectives - Minireview

8
D.-C. You et al.
Iraq, compiled a medical encyclopedia in which he refers to
the coffee bean as bunchum. His discussion of its healing
properties led to the belief that coffee was known as a medi-
cine over a thousand years ago. Similar references appear in
the writings of Avicenna (980-1037 AD), another distin-
guished Muslim physician and philosopher. When used in
reference to the beverage, the word ‘coffee’ is a modified
form of the Turkish word Kahveh, which is derived from
the Arabic word, Kahwa, which means ‘wine.’ This word
derivation reflects the belief that coffee has an effect on
people that is similar to the intoxication caused by alcohol.
Coffee was also used to treat an astounding variety of ail-
ments, including kidney stones, gout, smallpox, measles,
and coughs.
Habitual coffee consumption has been associated with
better glucose tolerance in persons without diabetes (Marjo
and Miia, 2010). Additionally, coffee contains phenolic com-
pounds with antioxidant properties and may affect the process
of atherosclerosis by reducing the risk of LDL-cholesterol
and by inhibiting platelet aggregation and thrombogenesis
(Bidel and Hu, 2006).
Caffeine displays a broad array of actions on the brain.
Recent epidemiological and experimental studies indicate that
long-term caffeine intake has beneficial effects against a
number of acute and chronic neurological disorders, includ-
ing stroke, AD, and Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Yukawa et
al., 2004).
Conflicting evidence has been found concerning the rela-
tionship between caffeinated coffee consumption and the
risk of CVD (Dale et al., 2010; Greenberg et al., 2007). A
recent study found that moderate consumption of coffee
was associated with a lower risk of mortality from CVD
(Anderson et al., 2006). On the other hand, the possible
health hazards of coffee have been related to its main ingre-
dients, caffeine. The aim of this review is to examine the
health effects of caffeinated coffee consumption on CVD
and dementia/AD.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL
FINDING
The longitudinal studies investigating the association
between coffee and/or tea consumption and dementia/AD or
cognitive function have showed partly inconsistent results
(Yohei et al., 2009; Xuesong et al., 2010; Eskelinen et al.,
2009). Coffee consumption was categorized into three groups:
low (0~2 cups/day), moderate (3~5 cups/day), and high (6 >
cups/day). Blood pressure (systolic and diastolic) and body
mass index (BMI) were measured and cognitive status was
assessed using a three-step protocol for the diagnosis of
dementia (a screening, a clinical phase, and a differential
diagnostic phase). Recent results from a 21-year follow-up
of the Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Aging and Dementia
study indicated that drinking three to five cups of coffee per
day at midlife (mean age 50.4 years) was associated with a
65% decreased risk of dementia and a 64% decreased risk
of AD in later in life. With regard to PD, it was reported 35
years ago that caffeine’s ability to inhibit adenosine recep-
tor activation could lessen a person’s risk of contracting that
disease. Subsequent retrospective and prospective epidemi-
ologic studies demonstrated that long-term caffeine intake
decreased the risk of developing PD.
A prospective cohort study indicated that no association
existed between caffeinated coffee consumption and a
higher risk of coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke, or all-
cause mortality in both age-and smoking-adjusted analysis
and multivariable analysis for lifestyle and other cardiovas-
cular risk factors (Ross et al., 2000; Weili et al., 2009).
Another prospective epidemiologic follow-up study indi-
cated that consumption of coffee, green tea, and oolong tea
and total caffeine intake was associated with a reduced or
mortality from CVD. With regard to strokes among men,
when coffee drinkers were compared to non-drinkers of
coffee, the multivariable hazards ratio (HR) for those drink-
ing 1~6 cups/week, 1~2 cups/day, and ≥3 cups/day were
0.78, 0.67, and 0.45, respectively.
AD, characterized clinically by progressive loss of mem-
ory and impaired cognition, is the most common form of
irreversible dementia in middle-aged and elderly people.
Pathologically, AD is characterized by synaptic loss and
neuronal cell death as well as the presence of extracellular
amyloid plaques, composed of the amyloid-β (Aβ) protein
and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles. According to the
‘amyloid hypothesis,’ increased levels of Aβ occur in AD
and Aβ leads to synaptic dysfunction, neuronal cell death,
and ultimately, impairment of higher cortical activity, includ-
ing memory and cognition. Currently, blood-brain barrier
(BBB) dysfunction is considered to be one of the earliest
pathological events underlying AD.
PD is a chronic neurodegenerative disease characterized
Fig. 1. Structure of caffeine and related molecules.

Possible Health Effects of Caffeinated Coffee Consumption on Alzheimer’s Disease and Cardiovascular Disease
9
clinically by tremor, imprecise movement, muscular rigidity,
and postural instability and pathologically by deficiency of
dopaminergic neurons. The cellular and molecular mecha-
nisms underlying the pathogenesis of PD are unclear at present,
but PD has been linked to neuroinflammation and oxida-
tive stress.
Coffee is a complex mixture of chemicals including caf-
feine, phenolic chlorogenic acid, and diterpenes. Caffeine is a
natural alkaloid and higher amounts of caffeine are found in
coffee than in any other dietary products. Coffee is also a
rich source of many other constituents that may contribute
to its biological activity including, potassium, niacin, magne-
sium, and antioxidant substances, such as tocopherols.
Caffeine can block adenosine receptors (A1, A2A, A2B,
and A3) distributed among the cellular components of the
neurovascular unit and, thereby, it stimulates cholinergic neu-
rons. In mice, it has been shown that both caffeine and ade-
nosine receptor antagonists prevent the accumulation of
amyloid-β-peptide (Aβ) in and around cerebral blood ves-
sels, resulting in cognitive deficits, such as cerebral amyloid
angiopathy (CAA). Several characteristics of CAA, which are
thought to contribute to acceleration of AD pathology,
include impaired neurovascular coupling, loss of cholinergic
activity, BBB damages, etc. Recent studies have shown that
chronic caffeine consumption reverses cognitive impairment
and decreases brain Aβ levels in AD mice. Chronic caf-
feine administration has been shown to have neuroprotec-
tive effects and is also related to caffeine action as an
adenosine receptor antagonist. Diterpenes are natural con-
stituents of coffee beans and, in some studies, they have
been associated with an increased risk of high serum total
and LDL-cholesterol concentrations. However, the method
by which the coffee is brewed may affect its cholesterol-
raising effect and filtering the coffee removes most of the
diterpenes (Dale et al., 2010).
In randomized trials, the consumption of unfiltered cof-
fee, such as boiled or French press coffee, increased serum
LDL-cholesterol concentrations, whereas paper-filtered cof-
fee did not have substantial effects on cholesterol concen-
tration levels (Zhang et al., 2009).
The effect of coffee on CVD remains debated because the
underlying mechanisms of its action are complex and involve
several behavioral risk factors. Caffeine appears to affect
blood pressure (BP) through adenosine receptor inhibition
and an increased release of select neurotransmitters. Caf-
feine levels peak 30~120 min after oral intake and caf-
feine’s half-life is 3~6 hrs. Caffeine tolerance diminishes the
acute effect of caffeine on BP and most of evidence sug-
gests that regular intake of caffeinated coffee does not
increase the risk of hypertension (Ranheim and Halvorsen,
2005).
CONCLUSION
Our findings suggest that moderate coffee consumption
may decrease the risk of dementia/AD and PD, later in life.
This review does not support the hypothesis that habitual
consumption of caffeinated coffee increases the risk of
CVD and mortality from CVD. However the moderate con-
sumption of coffee and caffeine intake was associated with
a lower risk of mortality from CVD.
REFERENCES
Adriana, M. (2007). The biography of coffee. Crabtree publish
com, pp. 4-30.
Anderson, L.F., Jacobs, D.R., Carlsen, M.H. and Blomhoff, R.
(2006). Consumption of coffee is associated with reduced risk
of death attributed to inflammatory and CVD in the Iowa
women’s Health study 26. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 83, 1039-1046.
Bidel, S. and Hu, G.S.J. (2006). Effects of coffee consumption on
glucose tolerance, serum glucose and insulin levels. Horm.
Metab. Res., 38, 38-43.
Dale, A.P., Hao-Liang, X. and Francesco, V. (2010). Caffeine and
the control of cerebral Hemodynamics. J. Alzheimer’s Disease,
20, 51-62.
Eskelinen, M.H., Ngandu, T., Tuomilehto, J., Soininen, H. and
Kivipelto, M. (2009). Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the
risk of late-life dementia. J. Alzheimer’s Disease, 16, 85-91.
Greenberg, J.A., Dunbar, C.C., Schnoll, R., Kokolis, R., Kokolis,
S. and Kassotis, J. (2007). Caffeinated-beverage intake and risk
of CHD motality in the elderly. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 85, 392-398.
Guglielmo, M.T., Clara, P., Giuseppe, F.M., Francesca, T. and
Daniela, C. (2010). Coffee, nutritional status and renal artery
resistive index. Renal Failure, 32, 1137-1147.
James, A., Grant, C. and Roy, C. (2008). Caffeinated coffee com-
sumption, Cardivascular disease and heart valve disease in the
elderly. Am. J. Cardiol., 102, 1502-1508.
Marjo, H.E. and Miia, K. (2010). Caffeine as a protective factor in
dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Disease, 20,
167-174.
Mary, B., Christine, M. and Catherine, A. (2009). Coffee Hermes
House, pp. 56-57.
Neha, R., Mamta, M., Amarnath, M., Swetha, B., Tejasudha, S.,
Kiranam, C. and Anil, K.C. (2009). Caffeine-induced effects in
heart rate in zebrafish embryos and possible mechanisms of
action. Zebrafish, 7, 69-71.
Nehlig, A. (1999). Are we dependent upon coffee and caffeine? A
review on human and animal data. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.,
23, 563-576.
Ranheim, T. and Halvorsen, B. (2005). Coffee consumption and
human health. Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 49, 274-284.
Ross, G., Abbott, R., Petrovitch, H., Morens, D., Grandinetti, A.,
Tung, K., Tanner, C., Masaki, K., Blanchette, P., Curb, J., Pop-
per, J. and White, L. (2000). Association of coffee and caffeine
intake with the risk of Parkinson’s Dis. JAMA, 283, 2674-2679.
Sarah, R.L. and Alan, M. (2003). On cooking technique expert
chefs (3rd editon), pp. 134-139.
Weili, Z., Frank, B., Esther, L.G., Tricia, Y.L. and Rob, M. (2009).
Coffee consumption and risk of CVD and all-cause mortality
among men with type2 diabetes. Diabetes Care, 32, 1043-1045.
Xuesong, C., Othman, G. and Jonathan, D.G. (2010). Caffeine pro-
tects against disruptions of the BBB in animal models of Alzhe-

10
D.-C. You et al.
imer’s and Parkinson’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Disease, 20, 127-
146.
Yohei, M., Akio, K., Yasuhiko, W., Hiroyasu, I., Yoshiyuki, W.,
Chigusa, D., Akio, Y., Shogo, K., Yutaka, I., Hideaki, T.,
Takaaki, K. and Akiko, T. (2009). Coffee, green tea, black tea
and oolong tea consumption and risk of mortality from CVD in
Japanese men and women. J. Epi. Com. Health, 10, 1-11.
Yukawa, G., Mune, M., Otani, H., Tone, Y., Liang, X.M., Lwa-
hashi, H. and Sakamoto, W. (2004). Effects of coffee consump-
tion on oxidative susceptibility of low-density lipoproteins and
serum lipid levels in humans. Biochem., 69, 70-74.
Zhang, W.L., Lopez, E., Li, T.Y., Hu, F.B. and Dam, R.M. (2009).
Coffee consumption and risk of cardiovascular events and all-
cause mortality among women with type2 diabetes. Diabetolo-
gia, 52, 810-817.
