Citation: Castillo, M.D.d.;
Iriondo-DeHond, A. Food Security
Opportunities from Plant to Coffee
Cup. Proceedings 2023, 89, 12.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ICC2023-14829
Academic Editor: Adriana Farah
Published: 7 August 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
proceedings
Abstract
Food Security Opportunities from Plant to Coffee Cup †
Maria Dolores del Castillo 1,*
and Amaia Iriondo-DeHond 2
1
Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación (CIAL), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientíﬁcas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), 28049 Madrid, Spain
2
Sección Departamental de Nutrición y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Departamento de Nutrición y Ciencia de
los Alimentos, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain; amaiairi@ucm.es
*
Correspondence: mdolores.delcastillo@csic.es
†
Presented at the International Coffee Convention 2023, Mannheim, Germany, 30 September–3 October 2023.
Abstract: Food insecurity and malnutrition, in a scenario further complicated by the enduring effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Ukraine War, are global priorities. The affordability of healthy
diets, which determines food security and nutrition indicators, is a tremendous challenge to be
solved by the transformation of food systems into sustainable ones. The coffee industry is being
transformed to contribute to end hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in all its forms and to
achieve affordable healthy diets for all. For achieving these goals, the policy of the coffee system for
its effective transformation should be based on innovation and research. About ninety percent of
the coffee cherry is discarded before reaching the cup that we have for breakfast each morning. The
“by-products” or waste generated in this process must be valued to increase the sustainability of the
coffee industry, in addition to maximizing the beneﬁts for the environment, society and economy. The
by-products (cascara, mucilage, parchment, silverskin and spent coffee grounds) can be converted
into new products to be incorporated into a healthy daily diet and daily life to enjoy, solve small
problems and contribute to making this the ﬁrst sustainable agricultural product in the world. In this
way, it is feasible to achieve a coffee value chain with zero waste, neutral products for the environment
and thousands of solutions for the present and future of humanity. As a consequence, in recent
decades, a lot of innovation and research have been focused on these global objectives. We present
our contribution in this ﬁeld.
Keywords: coffee; coffee by-products; nutrition security; sustainability; upcycling
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.I.-D. and M.D.d.C.; investigation, A.I.-D. and M.D.d.C.;
writing—original draft preparation, M.D.d.C.; writing—review and editing, A.I.-D. and M.D.d.C.;
supervision, M.D.d.C.; funding acquisition, M.D.d.C. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación., grant number
PID2019-111510RB-I00.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are
solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s).
MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from
any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
Proceedings 2023, 89, 12. https://doi.org/10.3390/ICC2023-14829
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/proceedings
