 
 
Page | 1 
 
Coffee, Dementia and 
Cognition: Literature Review  
2023 
 
“Alzheimer’s is brutal. I mean, it’s associated with losing your memory, but you don’t just forget who people 
are; you also forget how to talk, how to eat, how to do everything. That’s hard to wrap your head around 
until you actually see it.”  
— Seth Rogen 
InStyle, 1 Nov 2017 
about why he founded his Alzheimer's organization Hilarity for Charity 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 2 
Executive Summary: Alz And Coffee ................................................................................. 2 
Glossary Of Terms ......................................................................................................... 4 
Dementia, Alzheimer’s Disease (Ad) And Coffee ................................................................. 5 
   Dementia And Alzheimer’s Disease Background ............................................................... 5 
   Caffeine (Just One Of Many Bioactive Compounds In Coffee)  ............................................. 5 
   Caffeine & Adenosine:  A Complex Story .............................................................................. 5 
   Final Words On Caffeine … We Get It. .................................................................................. 7 
   Cautionary Notes On Caffeine ............................................................................................. 8 
Mechanisms Of Coffee’s Impact On The Brain .................................................................... 8 
   Coffee & Amyloid Beta Levels (Aβ) ...................................................................................... 8 
   Chlorogenic Acids And Other Antioxidant Compounds .......... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
   Chlorogenic Acid, Ferulic Acid And Types 2 & 3 Diabetes .................................................... 10 
   Decaffeinated Coffee ....................................................................................................... 12 
Summary ................................................................................................................... 12 
Citations ............................................................................................................................ 13 
 
 
 

 
 
Page | 2 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Our vision at Purity Coffee is to improve the world’s health through coffee.  This year at Purity as we continue our 
research on coffee and health, we turn to studies on a disease that is personal to several of our Purity team 
members—we have parents and grandparents who suffer from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and dementia. We wanted to 
investigate the literature on coffee and dementia and create a roast that (we imagine) follows the science of 
preventing dementia diseases in our families or improving the quality of life of our loved ones.  As our families and 
customers drink this coffee, we hope to collect stories that may point to additional research by our science partners. 
Essentially, we wanted to discover what properties in coffee have been shown by researchers to help with brain and 
cognitive functions. Much research on coffee and dementia also includes coffee’s impact on Parkinson’s disease.  We 
decided to separate the two and address Parkinson’s in the future on its own.  For this literature review, we wanted to 
investigate coffee and dementia with a focus on Alzheimer’s disease. Worldwide, around 50 million people have 
dementia, with nearly 10 million new cases yearly. Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia and 
may contribute to 60–70% of cases.1 What solutions or support might be found in coffee? 
Of course, caffeine is one obvious answer, but coffee is much more than just caffeine, especially regarding health. 
Coffee is a complex blend of compounds, the amounts and combination of which depend on the coffee quality.  
Which of these compounds, other than caffeine, might positively impact brain health? And is there anything about 
which we should be cautious? 
Many studies on coffee consumption are observational, associating disease incidence with multiple factors for which 
scientists record everything: Lifestyle choices, diet, level of exercise, genetics, geography, environment, culture, etc.  
Observational studies cover large populations and for them to be published, they must endure a rigorous scientific 
peer review process, which provides an unbiased, independent, and critical assessment of the research. This creates 
security both for the scientific community and the public alike.  Any study that is finally published in an academic, 
peer-reviewed medical journal has been vetted by multiple experts in their own specific fields. 
Scrutiny over research about coffee intake is known to be performed with high validity and reproducibility, 
particularly because coffee intake is a long-term habitual behavior, which makes it less prone to misreporting 
(Watson, 2017). Unfortunately, very few studies explained what “a cup of coffee” is, or they stated that it ranged in 
type and brew.  Quality is determined by the type of coffee (arabica or robusta), cultivar, handling and processing 
from farm to country of consumption, how it is roasted (degree of roasting, type of roaster used, etc.), when and how 
it is ground, and finally how it is brewed. A “cup of coffee” to many Westerners might be about 200 ml (about 6.7 fl. 
oz.) brewed using about 12-13 grams of coffee, a paper filter, and about 4 minutes of steep time… that’s a little strong 
for some people, but many studies are from other countries, where coffee is stronger and may not be filtered with 
paper.  The effects of preparation techniques on the antioxidant capacity of coffee brews is impactful, as studied by 
Komes and Belščak-Cvitanović in 2014.  
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: ALZ AND COFFEE 
ALZHEIMER’S STATS 
Alzheimer’s is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for an estimated 60% to 80% of cases. An estimated 
6.7 million Americans live with AD, with about 1 in 9 people (10.8%) age 65 and older having AD. Symptoms often 
 
 
1 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia 

 
 
Page | 3 
 
progress in this order: Difficulty remembering recent conversations, names or events; apathy and depression; 
communication problems, confusion, poor judgment and behavioral changes; and difficulty walking, speaking, and 
swallowing (ALZ.org, 2023). Caring for a person with Alzheimer’s or dementia often involves a team of people, and 
over 11 million Americans provide unpaid care for a family member or friend with dementia, valued nationally to 
reach nearly $340 billion.  
COFFEE AND AD 
According to a growing number of studies, coffee may have some benefits for preventing or delaying Alzheimer's 
disease. A vast amount of research exists specifically on caffeine and Alzheimer's and dementia, which we cannot 
ignore, but want to emphasize (again) that coffee is a complex food product with hundreds of compounds, of which 
caffeine is only one.  Overwhelmingly, coffee intake was associated with a decreased risk of cognitive disorders, but 
more specifically regarding disease prevention.   
The keys to coffee’s preventive effects lie in its antioxidant and anti-inflammation properties/compounds.  Oxidative 
stress and inflammation are the hallmarks of dementia and play a role in cognitive decline with age, because of 
numerous mechanisms, such as epigenetic alterations and genomic instability, affecting intracellular functions and 
intercellular communication.  Also, growing evidence suggests an influence of microbial-derived metabolites on 
neurological function, highlighting the role of gut microbiota in cognition—the enteric nervous system. Another 
related issue is recent research on the relationship between sugar intake, insulin and Alzheimer’s, with some 
researchers now calling AD “Type 3 Diabetes”.  In coffee, chlorogenic acid and other polyphenols (like ferulic acid), 
diterpenes (cafestol and kahweol), and trigonelline are the primary coffee compounds with anti-diabetic potential. 
Once Alzheimer's has taken hold, caffeinated coffee is only recommended to be consumed carefully, noting how the 
person feels afterward.  Since coffee can cause anxiety and sleeplessness in some people, this can compound the 
effect on those suffering from AD who do not react well to caffeine.  Common behavioral changes in those with AD 
such as feelings of nervousness, worry, or general agitation can be amplified by caffeine. Instead, naturally 
decaffeinated coffee, such as Swiss Water Process®, would be a better choice.  
DECAF AND AD 
The benefits of coffee for the brain can be found in decaffeinated coffee, too. Current evidence shows that 
decaffeinated coffee could be effective against neurodegeneration acting in different neurological pathways and 
disorders. Non-caffeine compounds in decaffeinated coffee have been shown to play an important role in the 
prevention and modulation of neurological disorders. Phenolic acids, such as chlorogenic and caffeic acids exhibit 
many positive neurological effects. Also, ferulic acid could be considered a promising compound, acting mainly not 
only as an antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neurotrophic agent, but also as protection against amyloid toxicity. In 
addition, many recent studies on quercetin show its great potential both for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
properties, and for its effect against amyloid beta aggregation and toxicity of tau hyperphosphorylation (considered to 
be the major trigger that causes abnormal tau that is toxic to neurons and leads to dementia) (Colombo and Papetti 
2019). 
CONCLUSION 
We need to encourage companies to source, test and produce coffees that bring out the most antioxidants and 
ensure the least amount of contaminants, like heavy metals and mycotoxins. This is important in coffee to support the 
preventive qualities that coffee has against dementia and AD because contaminants can impact both the brain and 
the enteric nervous system (the gut), all of which are important for neurological health.  When we pay more attention 
to something we do every day (and multiple times), the easiest choice we can make to make the biggest impact is to 
drink coffee proven to meet the highest health, nutritional and food safety standards. 
 

 
 
Page | 4 
 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
- 
Alzheimer's disease (AD): A type of dementia that 
causes problems with memory, thinking and 
behavior, reflecting deterioration in the functioning 
of the medial temporal lobe and hippocampus areas 
of the brain. Inflammation and atrophy of brain 
tissue are other changes. Symptoms usually develop 
slowly and worsen over time, becoming severe 
enough to interfere with daily tasks. As the disease 
progresses it affects the cerebral cortex functions of 
language and executive function (planning, abstract 
thinking, applying theory to practice, determining 
appropriate or inappropriate actions for situations, 
and acting on sensory information). Depression, 
apathy, agitation, delusions, hallucinations, 
wandering, aggression, incontinence, and altered 
eating habits also can occur later in the disease. 
- 
Amyloid Beta or Beta-amyloid (Aβ): A peptide that 
can accumulate and aggregate in the spaces 
between brain cells, forming clumps called amyloid 
plaques. This is the key peptide in the pathogenesis 
of AD. The gene for amyloid beta precursor protein 
is on chromosome 21. 
- 
Antagonist: In medicine, a substance that stops the 
action or effect of another substance. For example, 
when caffeine blocks adenosine receptors it’s an 
adenosine antagonist. 
- 
cAMP: Cyclic adenosine monophosphate is 
synthesized from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
located inside the plasma membrane and anchored 
at various locations in the interior of the cell, used 
for intracellular signal transduction, such as 
transferring into cells the effects of hormones like 
epinephrine and adrenaline, which cannot pass 
through the plasma membrane. cAMP is a 
neuropeptide involved in activating the 
trigeminocervical system leading to neurogenic 
inflammation and causing migraine. cAMP affects 
the function of higher-order thinking in the 
prefrontal cortex by regulating ion channels and 
closing brain cell communication. 
- 
Comorbidity: Two or more diseases or conditions 
occurring simultaneously, such as depression and 
Alzheimer’s. 
- 
Dementia: Not a specific disease, but a general term 
that describes a wide range of symptoms associated 
with a decline in memory or other cognitive skills 
severe enough to reduce a person's ability to 
perform everyday activities. Alzheimer's disease is 
the most common type of dementia.1 
- 
Dopamine: Having the right amount of dopamine is 
important both for your body and your brain. 
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter produced in the 
brain that makes you feel good and plays a role in 
several body functions, including motivation, 
attention, movement, memory, mood, and others. It 
also helps nerve cells to send messages to each 
other. 
- 
Glutamate:  A salt or ester of glutamic acid; the 
major excitatory neurotransmitter in the 
mammalian central nervous system and the most 
abundant free amino acid in the brain, involved in 
multiple metabolic pathways, such as information 
processing, storage, and retrieval. 
- 
Lewy bodies: When the protein alpha-synuclein 
deposits found in nerve cells collect in the brain 
cortex, which controls functions including sensory, 
motor, vision, hearing, taste, memory, and 
attention, Lewy body disease (DLB) or dementia can 
result.  Progressive cognitive decline, fluctuating 
alertness, lethargy, disorganized speech, and 
Parkinsonian motor symptoms (rigidity and/or loss 
of spontaneous movement) are signs of this. 
- 
NMNAT2:  Nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyl 
transferase 2. A key neuronal maintenance factor 
that provides strong neuroprotection in several 
preclinical models of neurological disorders and is 
shown to be significantly reduced in Alzheimer’s, 
Huntington’s, and Parkinson’s diseases. 
- 
Phenylindanes: Compounds that are produced 
during the roasting process and have a 
neuroprotective effect. Phenylindanes can inhibit 
the clumping of both beta-amyloid and tau, another 
protein that forms tangles in the brain and is linked 
to Alzheimer’s. 
- 
Tau protein:  A brain-specific, axon-enriched protein 
that helps stabilize the structure of nerve cells in the 
brain.  Nutrients and other essential substances flow 
through the tube-like structures, but in AD these 
tubules stick to other tau molecules,  forming a 
neurofibrillary tangle, ultimately destroying the 
neuron. This is one of the hallmark pathologies 
required for diagnosing AD.

 
 
Page | 5 
 
DEMENTIA, ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE (AD) AND COFFEE 
DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE BACKGROUND 
Dementia is a syndrome in which cognitive function deteriorates, and it is usually chronic and progressive.  It is 
found worldwide and is one of the major causes of disability and loss of independence among older people. 
Not only is it debilitating and overwhelming for the people who have it, but also for family, friends and 
caregivers, impacting everyone involved in physical, psychological, social, and financial ways. In some countries, 
those with dementia may even risk losing their basic human rights. There is no treatment currently available to 
cure dementia or to alter its progression, although new treatments are continually being investigated.  
As most studies show regarding good health, people can reduce their risk of dementia by exercising regularly, 
not smoking, avoiding the damaging use of alcohol, and maintaining a healthy weight, blood pressure, 
cholesterol and blood sugar levels. Of course, this leads us to focus on how coffee might be a healthy option in 
the anti-dementia arsenal.  
Genetic and experimental evidence shows key causes of AD are the accumulation of plaque deposits of the 
peptide β-amyloid (Aβ) in the brain and the tangles of the microtubule-binding protein tau. Aβ peptides are 
generated from the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the enzymes β-secretase (BASE1) and γ-
secretase. These two enzymes are key to AD development and will play a part in coffee discussions later in this 
paper. 
Preventing secretase production is a logical strategy to inhibit Aβ, although clinical trials in 2018 of secretase 
inhibitors were unsuccessful at stopping the cognitive decline in patients with mild-to-moderate AD (and 
inhibiting γ-secretase had several side effects). However, in 2009 Arendash et al. reported that caffeine 
protected AD mice against cognitive impairment and reduced Aβ production by reducing β- and γ -secretase 
activities, showing that coffee consumption could be a preventive intervention before the appearance of AD 
symptoms. 
Several epidemiological and preclinical studies supported the protective effect of coffee on Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) (please see citations at the end of this paper). 
CAFFEINE (JUST ONE OF MANY BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS IN COFFEE) 
CAFFEINE & ADENOSINE:  A COMPLEX STORY  
 
Caffeine is an alkaloid found in leaves, seeds, and fruits of coffee, cocoa, cola, guarana and tea plants. Within 
10 minutes of drinking coffee, the stomach and first part of the intestine absorb the caffeine, reaching 
maximum concentration in the bloodstream within about an hour.  Caffeine has quite a checkered reputation 
in the world of human consumption and health, causing debate and even emotional responses. This literature 
review intends to look specifically at what science has discovered about caffeine concerning brain functions, 
cognition, memory and related diseases. 
It is undeniable that many people drink coffee for the effect of caffeine on their alertness.  Caffeine is an 
antagonist of adenosine receptors (it blocks the receptors) in humans, most known for inhibiting neural activity 
and causing drowsiness.  This is just one result of the interaction of caffeine with adenosine and leads to 
increased activity of the neurotransmitters dopamine and glutamate (see glossary, p.3). The story of caffeine, 
adenosine and the brain is complex and involves several effects, actions, and counter-effects. 

 
 
Page | 6 
 
Adenosine is present in all cells, and performs numerous actions in the body, among them: (1) Adenosine 
plays a role in inflammatory response. It is released to reduce inflammation and prevent tissue damage 
(Chakraborti 2003). (2) Adenosine receptors are key in opening the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which increases 
transport of amyloid plaque antibodies and prodrugs associated with AD. Since inflammation is an essential 
part of the AD pathogenic pathway and AD includes increased oxidative stress, it is possible that the anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant actions of coffee contribute to its pro-cognitive effects. 
Administration of adenosine receptor agonists (mainly A1) disrupts learning and memory in rodents, while the 
nonselective adenosine receptor blockade by caffeine/theophylline or selective blockade of A1 and A2A 
receptors improves the performances of rodents in different behavioral tasks. Caffeine helps support 
antioxidant activity, and its catabolic products theobromine and xanthine also exhibit antioxidant properties 
(Azam 2003). 
Also, at high doses, caffeine inhibits cAMP (see Glossary page 3), yet a low dose of caffeine regulates cAMP 
levels through antagonism of the A2A receptor.  In certain parts of the body caffeine modulates intracellular 
levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which regulates immune cell functions, playing an 
important role in metabolism and promoting the release of insulin from pancreatic beta cells. Upregulation of 
cAMP inhibits the activation of inflammatory effector cells such as T cells. In T cells, cAMP downregulates 
various cellular functions, including cytokine production 
and cytotoxicity (Setkovsky 1988). In short, the lower 
doses of caffeine were proinflammatory, which would be 
difficult to deduce from the 
observational/epidemiological studies.  This is one 
reason that scientists believe it is the caffeine in 
conjunction with other compounds in coffee 
(chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, ferulic acid, etc.), 
diterpenes (cafestol, kahweol), and trigonelline, which 
may exert protective effects (Farah et. al. 2019). 
With receptors distributed in all brain cells, any 
imbalance of such a widespread system is expected to 
lead to neurological dysfunctions/diseases (Ribero 
2010), which means that caffeine, like adenosine, can 
potentially exert effects on all brain areas. Whenever a 
person’s internally produced adenosine levels are 
activating receptors continuously with low 
neurotransmitter levels, caffeine is shown to do the 
opposite of adenosine receptor activation. This means 
caffeine can affect brain activities such as sleep, 
reasoning, learning, and memory, and modify brain 
dysfunctions and diseases: Alzheimer’s disease, 
Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, epilepsy, 
pain/migraine, depression, and others (Ribero 2010; 
Zeitlin et. al 2011).  
The seemingly paradoxical use of both adenosine 
receptor agonists and antagonists as neuroprotective 
agents have been attributed to differences in dosage 
levels (Rivera-Oliver and Díaz-Rios 2014). There have 
NMNAT2 AND cAMP 
In 2017, Ali, Bradley, and Lu demonstrated that an 
enzyme called NMNAT2 has a protective effect on our 
brain and can even guard it against dementia. The 
enzyme reduces one of the main reasons for 
dementia: misfolded tau proteins that accumulate 
with age as plaques in our brain. Neurodegenerative 
diseases with deposits of tau protein are called 
tauopathies; the most famous tauopathy is 
Alzheimer's, although misfolded proteins also have 
been linked to Parkinson’s, Huntington’s and Lou 
Gehrig’s diseases. 
The discovery of NMNAT2 led to a search for 
substances that can increase its production in the 
brain. Of 1,280 different products analyzed, 24 proved 
to be NMNAT2-increasing, and the most effective one 
was caffeine, which has been shown to improve 
memory function in mice genetically modified to 
produce high levels of misfolded tau proteins. 
Caffeine, when systemically administered, restored 
NMNAT2 expression in rTg4510 tauopathy mice to 
normal levels. Caffeine was one of four selected 
positive modulators that exerted NMNAT2-specific 
neuroprotection against vincristine-induced cell death, 
and these positive modulators are predicted to 
increase cAMP concentration, suggesting that 
neuronal NMNAT2 levels are tightly regulated by 
cAMP signaling. 

 
 
Page | 7 
 
been hundreds of studies of caffeine and cognitive disorders. In a 2015 meta-analysis, out of 293 articles 
identified through the search and bibliographies of relevant articles, 20 epidemiological studies from 19 
articles, which involved 1,479 participants (8,398 in six cross-sectional studies, 4,601 in five case-control 
studies, and 19,918 in nine cohort studies), were included in the final analysis: Researchers noted specifically 
about coffee (not just caffeine) that “Coffee intake was associated with a decreased risk of cognitive disorders 
in the meta-analysis of all the observational studies including cross-sectional, case-control, and cohort 
studies.” (Kim et al. 2015).  
FINAL WORDS ON CAFFEINE … WE GET IT. 
 
In a 2016 study (n = 6,467), caffeine intake was associated with a lower risk of incident dementia and cognitive 
decline in women over the age of 65 (Driscoll et al. 2016). In a 2016 meta-analysis of 29,155 participants 
enrolled in 11 prospective studies, no association was found between caffeine intake and dementia or 
cognitive decline, but high caffeine intake was significantly associated with a decreased risk of incident AD (Liu 
et al. 2016). In a 2017 meta-analysis of 34,282 individuals enrolled in 9 prospective cohort studies, a J-shaped 
association was found whereby 1–2 cups of coffee daily intake was associated with a lower risk of cognitive 
disorders, but the association for 3 cups of coffee or more was not significant (Wu et al. 2017). However, a 
2018 dose-response meta-analysis of 8 prospective studies found no significant association between caffeine 
dosage and the risk of AD or dementia (Larsson and Orsini 2018). Nevertheless, a 2019 study found that 
compared to drinking less than two cups of coffee daily, lifetime drinking two or more cups of coffee a day was 
significantly associated with reduced Aβ plaque burden in 411 cognitively intact older adults (Kim et al. 2019). 
Putting together all these meta-studies, the overall conclusion is that caffeine intake may be associated with a 
decreased risk of dementia, cognitive decline, and/or AD.  
In AD mouse models, caffeine significantly decreases senile plaques and amyloid beta (Aβ) levels while also 
protecting against or reversing cognitive impairment. In 2009, Arendash et al. demonstrated that Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) transgenic mice given a moderate level of caffeine intake (the human equivalent of 5 cups of 
coffee per day) were protected from the development of certain cognitive impairments and had decreased 
hippocampal amyloid-β (Aβ) levels due to suppression of both β-secretase and γ-secretase expression.  
Similarly, in 2009, Cao et al. showed that long-term oral caffeine treatment to aged AD mice provided not only 
sustained reductions in plasma Aβ but also decreased soluble and deposited Aβ in the hippocampus and 
cortex. 
Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier has been reported in AD and appears to precede Aβ plaque formation in 
mice, however, caffeine was shown to block disruptions in the blood-brain barrier induced by a high-
cholesterol diet in rabbits. Researchers concluded that blood-brain barrier stabilization by caffeine could be a 
viable mechanism for consideration. A final word on caffeine:  The therapeutic benefits of coffee are not due to 
caffeine alone. One study showed that improvements in cognition and psychomotor behaviors in aged rats 
were due to coffee, and not caffeine itself. In line with these observations, crude caffeine – a by-product of the 
coffee decaffeination process – was observed in another study to have a greater therapeutic effect on memory 
impairment in AD mouse model than pure caffeine(Chu et al. 2012). Specifically, the study reported that 
administration of crude caffeine, but not pure caffeine, reduced amyloid burden, improved antioxidant activity, 
and enhanced glucose uptake in AD mouse model.  
This glucose connection is important:  Researchers have been studying the link of Type 2 diabetes with AD, with 
large longitudinal studies showing that adults with Type 2 diabetes have a higher risk of developing 
Alzheimer's.  More on this in a bit. 

 
 
Page | 8 
 
 
MECHANISMS OF COFFEE’S IMPACT ON THE BRAIN 
COFFEE & AMYLOID BETA LEVELS (Aβ) 
 
The literature is abundant that caffeine intake has been associated with a lower incidence of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) in humans, but let’s move on to coffee’s other components.  
It remains controversial whether a single ingredient in coffee is effective against Aβ pathology or whether a 
combination of ingredients is effective. In 2019 Kim et al. set out to determine whether coffee is specifically 
related to reduced brain AD pathologies in humans. They investigated relationships between coffee intake and 
in vivo AD pathologies, including cerebral beta-amyloid (Aβ) deposition, the neurodegeneration of AD signature 
regions, and cerebral white matter hyperintensities (WMH). A total of 411 non-demented older adults with 
various coffee consumption levels underwent comprehensive clinical assessment and multimodal 
neuroimaging. Lifetime coffee intake of ≥2 cups/day was significantly associated with a lower Aβ positivity than 
coffee intake of <2 cups/day, even after controlling for potential confounders. In contrast, neither lifetime nor 
current coffee intake was related to hypometabolism, atrophy of the AD-signature region, or WMH volume. 
CAUTIONARY NOTES ON CAFFEINE 
Much of the research on caffeine and AD is particularly relevant for preventing AD.  However, a few studies highlight 
caffeine’s physiological effects that could exacerbate anxiety-like behavioral and psychological symptoms when 
someone is already diagnosed with AD. Overuse and dependency can occur with continual usage and after 
consuming caffeine in large amounts.  This may induce “caffeinism,” which combines caffeine dependency with 
various unpleasant physical and mental conditions including insomnia, headaches, nervousness, irritability, anxiety, 
muscle twitching, respiratory issues, and heart palpitations. The aggravation of common anxiety-like behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia may partially interfere with the beneficial cognitive effects to the extent that 
they can push in the opposite direction.  
Habitual caffeine consumption increases CYP1A2 activity, which has implications for the metabolism of various 
medications and the synthesis of cholesterol, steroids and other lipids. Caffeine is an inducer of CYP1A2, which is 
also the enzyme responsible for caffeine's metabolism. On the other hand, drugs that inhibit CYP1A2 activity 
interfere with the metabolism and elimination of caffeine, increasing the risk of its toxic effects. Continual 
consumption of caffeine can lead to tolerance. Because several drug interactions may occur between caffeine and 
medications, patients taking caffeine-containing medicine or coffee drinkers taking drugs that interact with CYP1A2 
may require dosage adjustments or need to avoid coffee, despite its potential benefits (Carrillo 2000). 
Drug interactions between caffeine and other psychoactive drugs may lead to caffeine-related or medication-related 
side effects. For example, use of ketamine in combination with caffeine enhances its stimulant responses and lethal 
risk, suggesting a potentially toxic interaction and the interaction between caffeine and antiepileptic drugs can 
increase seizure frequency (Hsu 2009, Jankiewicz 2007). 
Finally, of course, getting good, non-disturbed sleep is also key to overall good health, so there is a balance between 
drinking coffee at the right time and avoiding caffeine at least 8 hours before going to bed, if it disturbs sleep.    
 

 
 
Page | 9 
 
The findings suggest that higher lifetime coffee intake may contribute to lowering the risk of AD or related 
cognitive decline by reducing pathological cerebral amyloid deposition. 
From Kim et al: The present finding of the relationship between higher coffee intake and a decreased rate of 
pathological Aβ deposition is in line with results from previous studies using animal models, which indicated 
that higher caffeine, one of the major ingredients of coffee, intake exerts a protective effect via molecular Aβ-
related mechanisms16–18,37,38. For example, Arendash et al.18 suggested that caffeine protects AD mice 
against cognitive impairment and reduces brain Aβ production by deactivating the positive-feedback loop from 
the γ- to β-secretase cleavages on the Aβ protein precursor. The same group also reported that high caffeine 
intake improves the cognitive performance of aged AD mice, but not of wild-type mice, with reduced brain Aβ 
levels, suggesting that a decrease in Aβ concentration mediates the cognitive enhancing effect of caffeine in AD 
mice (Arendash 2009).  
Additionally, in 2009 Cao et al. reported that caffeine suppresses Aβ levels in the plasma and brain of AD mice 
and also suggested that caffeine and other components in coffee may synergize to protect against cognitive 
decline in AD mice. Moreover, Li et al. indicated that caffeine suppresses Aβ protein precursor internalization 
and Aβ generation via adenosine A3 receptor-mediated actions. The present finding also provides a 
neuropathological explanation for the relationship between higher coffee intake and reduced risk of AD 
dementia observed in several clinical and epidemiological studies. Those studies reported higher coffee 
drinkers had a 31–65% decrease in the risk of AD dementia, which is quite comparable to about 65% decrease 
of Aβ positivity rate in higher coffee drinkers(27.14%) compared to lower coffee drinkers (17.61%). 
Furthermore, the relationship between higher coffee intake and lower Aβ positivity was more prominent for 
lifetime coffee intake than for current coffee intake. This suggests that the protective effects of higher coffee 
intake against Aβ pathology involve the chronic effects associated with prolonged exposure rather than an 
acute or short-term effect.  
It remains controversial whether a single ingredient in coffee is effective against Aβ pathology or whether a 
combination of ingredients is effective. Published in 2021, data from the 10½ year Australian Imaging, 
Biomarkers, and Lifestyle Study support that habitual coffee intake may be a protective factor against AD, and 
evidence suggests the observed benefits are not due to caffeine alone. Increased coffee consumption could 
contribute to slower cognitive decline potentially by slowing the rate of cerebral Aβ-amyloid accumulation, 
ameliorating the associated neurotoxicity from Aβ-amyloid-mediated oxidative stress and inflammatory 
processes. Overall, coffee intake could be incorporated as a modifiable lifestyle factor to delay the onset of AD. 
CHLOROGENIC ACID (CGA) 
Chlorogenic acids (CGA) are a group of phenolic compounds produced by certain plants and are a major 
component of coffee. CGA has various biological effects, such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer 
and anti-diabetic activities. They may also protect your eyesight by preventing the development of diabetic 
cataracts. CGA is metabolized in your body into quinic acid and caffeic acid, which may have further health 
benefits. 
Coffee’s high concentration of CGA is why coffee is considered one of the most important contributors to 
antioxidant intake in many countries since people drink it daily and often multiple times.  There is an 
abundance of literature on coffee CGA and its antioxidant activity.  CGA plays one of the most important roles 
in coffee’s positive impact on brain health. Maintaining homeostasis and health happens from the uptake of 
various antioxidants from food, and many plants we eat produce antioxidant polyphenols. The beneficial 
effects of coffee may be attributed in part to polyphenols and caffeine serving as antioxidants (Farah 2019 V.1, 

 
 
Page | 10 
 
Ch. 9), and the polyphenols in black coffee (without milk products) are readily bioavailable, which is not the 
case with all foods.  
While the mechanism by which CGA impacts the brain isn’t completely understood, “About ⅓ of consumed 
chlorogenic acids are absorbed in the small intestine and about ⅔ of consumed chlorogenic acids are absorbed 
in the large intestine” (Socala 2020). Those that are absorbed in the large intestine will get metabolized by the 
gut microbiota. Much more is left to learn on how this could impact our microbiota and how this plays an 
underlying role in the cognitive benefits of CGA based on the connection between our enteric nervous system 
and the central nervous system. 
It is important to mention, though, that the roasting process has a major impact on CGA:  The darker the coffee 
is roasted, the more some of the original nine CGA break down to form CGA lactones (CGL) or quinides during 
the roasting process.  The CGA content can vary among coffees due to general plant nutrition, growing 
conditions, cultivar, processing, and roasting (Jung et al. 2017). For example, CGA concentrations are higher in 
light roasts and in the robusta species. This becomes important to note as the CGA concentration may 
influence a coffee’s ability to impact cognitive processes as higher cognitive scores have been associated with 
drinking robusta varieties, though not significantly (Alharbi et al. 2018). Lighter roasted coffees are higher in 
chlorogenic acids, but also higher in acrylamide, so a balanced approach of a light-medium roast is needed for 
optimum health-roasted coffee.  
It is important to note that CGA in supplement form hasn’t shown the same beneficial impact as when 
consumed naturally with coffee or decaf. Scientists seek to learn more about why, with the thousands of other 
compounds in coffee, there is a synergistic effect between other coffee compounds and CGA leading to this 
mental benefit and unique effect requiring coffee as the source.   
POLYPHENOLS [CHLOROGENIC ACID (CGA) FERULIC ACID] AND TYPES 2 & 3 DIABETES 
Emerging evidence highlighted that hyperglycemia and brain insulin resistance represent risk factors for AD 
development, thus suggesting an additional AD mode, associated with glucose metabolism impairment. Some 
researchers now refer to this as Type 3 diabetes to highlight insulin resistance and insulin-like growth factor 
dysfunction in the brain as a possible cause of Alzheimer's disease, because they may impair the function and 
survival of neurons and lead to inflammation and oxidative stress. High blood sugar levels may damage the 
blood vessels in the brain and reduce blood flow, which may affect cognitive function and increase the risk of 
strokes.  
Also, research suggests a connection between Type 2 diabetes and the production or accumulation of amyloid 
beta and tau proteins.  The prevention of both types 2 & 3 diabetes involves reducing the risk factors for 
diabetes and applying them to Alzheimer's disease, such as maintaining a healthy weight, limiting alcohol 
intake, managing cholesterol levels, eating a balanced diet rich in antioxidants and omega-3 fatty acids, and 
limiting sugar intake.  Coffee can help support the reduction of all these risk factors with some of its many 
compounds. 
Specifically, CGA in coffee stimulates the production of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1). The average coffee 
drinker may ingest between 500-1000 mg of CGA per day (McCarty 2005). Both human and animal studies 
suggest GLP-1 protects against diabetes by enhancing beta-cell responsiveness to hyperglycemia. (McCarty 
2005, Nieber 2017).  
Another risk factor for diabetes is the accumulation of misfolded proinsulin or amylin molecules in the beta 
cells. Coffee polyphenols, including 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid, pyrocatechol, and melanoidins, may help preserve 

 
 
Page | 11 
 
beta-cell function by disrupting this process (Kolb 2021). Additionally, chlorogenic acid and caffeic acid may 
counteract some of the damaging effects of a high-fat diet on pancreatic beta cells. In one study, mice fed a 
high-fat diet experienced reduced body weight and visceral fat when placed on chlorogenic acid supplements 
(Lee 2019). 
Ferulic acid is another notable coffee compound.  It is a hydroxycinnamic acid derivative, widely distributed in 
nature, especially in fruits, and known to be endowed with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and antidiabetic, 
thus suggesting it could be exploited as a possible neuroprotective strategy.  Some studies have shown that 
ferulic acid can affect glucose metabolism, exhibiting antidiabetic effects in vitro and in vivo models. Ferulic 
acid forms a substance that scavenges free radicals and reduces oxidative stress. It improves glucose and lipid 
profiles in diabetic rats by enhancing the activities of antioxidant enzymes, superoxide dismutase and catalase 
in the pancreatic tissue, and improves the uptake of certain diabetic medications (Nankar 2017). 
Phenylindanes are coffee compounds formed from hydroxylated cinnamates such as caffeic acid during 
roasting, and higher concentrations are found in dark roast coffees (Mancini et al.2018). These bitter-tasting 
compounds have been shown to have strong antioxidant activity. Phenylindanes in coffee were shown to 
inhibit Aβ and tau aggregation and support neuroprotection in AD pathologies for individuals who consumed 
coffee (Mancini et al. 2018). Phenylindanes are unique in that they are the only compound investigated in the 
study that prevents -- or rather, inhibits -- both beta-amyloid and tau, two protein fragments common in 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, from clumping (University Health Network 2018). 
COFFEE’S METAL CHELATING PROPERTIES 
Exposures to lead, cadmium, and manganese are ubiquitous in our environments and stored in cells around the 
body. Lead was commonly used in commercial products in the last century, and was only banned in the 1970’s, 
Similarly, cadmium is also found throughout the environment, particularly in cigarette smoke, certain foods 
(shellfish, grains or plants that may absorb cadmium from soil and water, where it is prevalent.  Cadmium’s 
long half-life in the kidney as does manganese with a similarly long half-life in tissues, and especially 
accumulates in the brain. Older adults carry historic exposure to these metals, and lead, cadmium, and 
manganese are well-documented neurotoxicants acting through multiple pathways to contribute to AD 
pathology.  
These metals induce oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and apoptosis (programmed cell death) in neurons. 
In addition, animal models treated with these metals observe AD-related pathological features in the brain (Aβ 
and tau tangles). Human epidemiologic studies have consistently shown lead, cadmium, and manganese are 
associated with impaired cognitive function and cognitive decline in adults (Bakulski et al. 2020). 
In addition to the organic bases and phenolic compounds (CGA and caffeoyl tryptophan), melanoidins and 
phenylindanes produce antioxidant activity in coffee.  More than 300 heterocyclic compounds (which include 
many biochemicals essential to the metabolism of all living things) are also found in brewed coffee. These 
include pyrroles, furans, thiophenes, pyrazines and thiazoles, which exert antioxidant activity, are chelating 
agents (remove toxic metals from the body) and modulate the activity of several enzyme systems, which 
protect the body against chemical and physical stressors (Muriel 2012).   
Melanoidins, in particular, have been shown to have metal-chelating activity for various metals, such as iron, 
copper, zinc, calcium, and aluminum. In addition, CGA and two compounds derived from CGA during roasting 
(p-Coumaroyl-(L)-tryptophan and quinic acid), which can be present in high concentrations in coffee beans, 
have been suggested to have metal-chelating properties for iron and aluminum. By modulating the 
bioavailability or toxicity of metals in the body, coffee has shown another way to have AD prevention potential. 

 
 
Page | 12 
 
DECAFFEINATED COFFEE 
Decaf coffee still contains significant amounts of CGA and many of the other compounds noted in this review. 
High-CGA decaf coffee is associated with improved mood and attention processes compared to regular-CGA 
decaf coffee, supporting a dose-response relationship that is not dependent on caffeine (Cropley 2012). In 
another 2012 study, researchers found that decaffeinated coffee may improve glucose utilization in the brain, 
reducing the risk for Type 2 diabetes and the brain dysfunction associated with some neurological and 
neurocognitive disorders. "Impaired energy metabolism in the brain is known to be tightly correlated with 
cognitive decline during aging and in subjects at high risk for developing neurodegenerative disorders. This is 
the first evidence showing the potential benefits of decaffeinated coffee preparations for both preventing and 
treating cognitive decline caused by type 2 diabetes, aging, and/or neurodegenerative disorders" (Mount Sinai 
2012). 
SUMMARY 
In summary, the overall trend emerging from the literature review of the past 30 years suggests that regular 
coffee consumption can be a protective factor against the evolution of Alzheimer’s Disease and other 
dementias. An abundance of research on caffeine, and particularly coffee, has shown it prevents the 
accumulation of beta-amyloid, a protein that forms plaques in the brain and is commonly associated with 
Alzheimer's.  Other research has shown that coffee … 
•  Reduces the risk of developing diabetes, which is a risk factor for Alzheimer's. Caffeine, chlorogenic acid and 
ferulic acid can improve insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism, lowering blood sugar levels. 
 
•  Enhances cognitive function and memory by stimulating the central nervous system and increasing the levels 
of neurotransmitters such as dopamine, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine. 
•  Has an antioxidant effect, which can protect the brain cells from oxidative stress and inflammation that can 
damage the neurons and impair cognition. Coffee also contains phenylindanes, compounds that are produced 
during the roasting process and have a neuroprotective effect. Phenylindanes can inhibit the clumping of both 
beta-amyloid and tau, another protein that forms tangles in the brain and is linked to Alzheimer's. 
 
However, it is important to note that these findings are just the beginning of our understanding of the 
complexity of coffee and its impact on human health. For coffee drinkers, choosing a healthy coffee is one of 
the most powerful choices you can make for your health. 
 
PUT A QUOTE HERE FROM PERLMUTTER? 
 
 

 
 
Page | 13 
 
CITATIONS 
 
• 
Ali YO, Bradley G, Lu H-C. (2017). Screening with an NMNAT2-MSD platform identifies small molecules that 
modulate NMNAT2 levels in cortical neurons. Scientific Reports online, 7 March 2017.  
• 
ALZ Association, Tau Topic Sheet, https://www.alz.org/media/Documents/alzheimers-dementia-tau-ts.pdf. 
Downloaded 11 June 2023. 
• 
ALZ Association, 2023 Alzheimer’s Facts and Figures, https://www.alz.org/media/Documents/alzheimers-facts-
and-figures.pdf, Downloaded 11 June 2023. 
• 
Arendash GW, et al. Caffeine reverses cognitive impairment and decreases brain amyloid-beta levels in aged 
Alzheimer's disease mice. J. Alzheimer Dis. 17, 661–680 (2009). 
• 
Arendash GW, et al. Caffeine protects Alzheimer's mice against cognitive impairment and reduces brain beta-
amyloid production. Neuroscience 142, 941–952 (2006). 
• 
Baeta-Corral R, Johansson B, Giménez-Llort L. (2018) Long-term Treatment with Low-Dose Caffeine Worsens BPSD-
Like Profile in 3xTg-AD Mice Model of Alzheimer's Disease and Affects Mice with Normal Aging. Front Pharmacol. 
2018;9:79. 
• 
Baeta-Corral R, Giménez-Llort L. (2015). Persistent hyperactivity and distinctive strategy features in the Morris 
water maze in 3xTg-AD mice at advanced stages of disease. Behav. Neurosci. 129 129–137. 
• 
Bakulski KM, Seo YA, Hickman RC, et al. Heavy Metals Exposure and Alzheimer's Disease and Related 
Dementias. J Alzheimer’s Dis. 2020;76(4):1215-1242.  
• 
Byun MS, et al. Korean Brain Aging Study for the Early Diagnosis and Prediction of Alzheimer’s Disease: 
methodology and baseline sample characteristics. Psychiatry Investig. 14, 851–863 (2017). 
• 
Cao C, et al. Caffeine suppresses amyloid-beta levels in plasma and brain of Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice. J. 
Alzheimer Dis. 17, 681–697 (2009). 
• 
Cao C, et al. Caffeine synergizes with another coffee component to increase plasma GCSF: linkage to cognitive 
benefits in Alzheimer's mice. J. Alzheimer Dis. 25, 323–335 (2011). 
• 
Carman AJ, Mills JH, Krenz A, Kim DG,  Bynoe MS. (2011). Adenosine receptor signaling modulates permeability of 
the blood-brain barrier. J. Neurosci. 31 (37): 13272–80.  
• 
Chakraborti S, Mandal M, Das S, Mandal A, Chakraborti T (2003). Regulation of matrix metalloproteinases: an 
overview. Mol Cell Biochem;253:269–85.  
• 
Chang KL, Ho PC (2014) Gas Chromatography Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (GC-TOF-MS)-Based Metabolomics 
for Comparison of Caffeinated and Decaffeinated Coffee and Its Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. PLoS ONE 
9(8): e104621. 
• 
Colombo R, Papetti A. An outlook on the role of decaffeinated coffee in neurodegenerative diseases. Crit Rev Food 
Sci Nutr. 2020;60(5):760-779. 
• 
Chu Y-F, Chang WH, Black RM, Liu JR, Sompol P, et al. (2012) Crude caffeine reduces memory impairment and 
amyloid beta(1–42) levels in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. Food Chem 135: 2095–2102. 
• 
Daly JW. Caffeine analogs: biomedical impact. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences (2007). Volume 64. pp. 2153–
2169. 

 
 
Page | 14 
 
• 
Driscoll I, Shumaker SA, Snively BM, Margolis KL, Manson JE, Vitolins MZ, Rossom RC, Espeland MA (2016) 
Relationships between caffeine intake and risk for probable dementia or global cognitive impairment: The women’s 
health initiative memory study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 71, 1596-1602. 
• 
Eskelinen MH, Ngandu T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto M (2009) Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the risk 
of late-life dementia: a population based CAIDE study. J Alzheimers Dis 16: 85–91. 
• 
Freedman ND, Park Y, Abnet CC, Hollenbeck AR, and Sinha R. (2012). Association of coffee drinking with total and 
cause-specific mortality. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 1891–1904.  
• 
Fukuyama K, Kakio S, Nakazawa Y, Kobata K, Funakoshi-Tago M, Suzuki T, Tamura H. (2018) Roasted Coffee Reduces 
β-Amyloid Production by Increasing Proteasomal β-Secretase Degradation in Human Neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y Cells. 
Mol Nutr Food Res. Nov;62(21):e1800238. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201800238. Epub 2018 Sep 9. PMID: 30144352. 
• 
Gardener SL, Rainey-Smith SR, Villemagne VL, et al. Higher Coffee Consumption Is Associated With Slower Cognitive 
Decline and Less Cerebral Aβ-Amyloid Accumulation Over 126 Months: Data From the Australian Imaging, 
Biomarkers, and Lifestyle Study. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021;13:744872. Published 2021 Nov 19. 
• 
Gelber RP, Petrovitch H., Masaki KH, Ross GW & White LR. Coffee intake in midlife and risk of dementia and its 
neuropathologic correlates. J. Alzheimer Dis. 23, 607–615 (2011). 
• 
Ho L, Varghese M, Wang J, Zhao W, Chen F, et al. (2012) Dietary supplementation with decaffeinated green coffee 
improves diet-induced insulin resistance and brain energy metabolism in mice. Nutr Neurosci 15: 37–45. 
• 
Horrigan LA, Kelly JP, Connor TJ (2006). Immunomodulatory effects of caffeine: friend or foe? Pharmacol. Ther., 
111, 877–892. 
• 
Kim JW, Byun MS, Yi D, Lee JH, Jeon SY, Jung G, Lee HN, Sohn BK, Lee JY, Kim YK, Shin SA, Sohn CH, Lee DY (2019) 
Coffee intake and decreased amyloid pathology in human brain. Transl Psychiatry 9, 270. 
• 
Komes D,  Belščak-Cvitanović A (2014). Effects of Preparation Techniques on the Antioxidant Capacity of Coffee 
Brews. Processing and Impact on Antioxidants in Beverages, 87–97.  
• 
Larsson SC , Orsini N (2018) Coffee consumption and risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: A dose-response 
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Nutrients 10, E1501. 
• 
Liu QP, Wu YF, Cheng HY, Xia T, Ding H, Wang H, Wang ZM, Xu Y (2016) Habitual coffee consumption and risk of 
cognitive decline/dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Nutrition 32, 
628–636. 
• 
Mancini RS, Wang Y, Weaver DF. Phenylindanes in Brewed Coffee Inhibit Amyloid-Beta and Tau 
Aggregation. Front Neurosci. 2018;12:735. Published 2018 Oct 12. 
• 
McCarty MF. A chlorogenic acid-induced increase in GLP-1 production may mediate the impact of heavy 
coffee consumption on diabetes risk. Medical Hypotheses. 2005;64(4):848-853. 
• 
Michailidis M, Moraitou D, Tata DA, Kalinderi K, Papamitsou T, Papaliagkas V. Alzheimer's Disease as 
Type 3 Diabetes: Common Pathophysiological Mechanisms between Alzheimer's Disease and Type 2 
Diabetes. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23(5):2687. Published 2022 Feb 28. 

 
 
Page | 15 
 
• 
Mostofsky E, Schlaug G, Mukamal KJ, Rosamond WD & Mittleman MA. Coffee and acute ischemic stroke onset: the 
Stroke Onset Study. Neurology 75, 1583–1588 (2010). 
• 
Mount Sinai, https://www.mountsinai.org/about/newsroom/2012/newsmedicalnet-decaffeinated-coffee-may-
improve-brain-energy-metabolism-linked-with-type-2-diabetes. Accessed 14 June 2023. 
• 
Murphy MP, LeVine H 3rd. Alzheimer's disease and the amyloid-beta peptide. J Alzheimer’s Dis. 2010;19(1):311-23.  
• 
Nankar R, Prabhakar PK, Doble M. Hybrid drug combination: Combination of ferulic acid and metformin 
as anti-diabetic therapy. Phytomedicine2017,37, 10–13. 
• 
Nehlig A, Daval JL, Debry G (1992). Caffeine and the central nervous system: mechanisms of action, biochemical, 
metabolic and psychostimulant effects. Brain Research Reviews, 17(2), 139–170. 
• 
Nieber K. The impact of coffee on health. Planta Med. 2017;83(16):1256-1263. doi:10.1055/s-0043-115007 
• 
Olthof MR, van Dijk AE, Deacon CF, Heine RJ, van Dam RM (2011) Acute effects of decaffeinated coffee and the 
major coffee components chlorogenic acid and trigonelline on incretin hormones. Nutr Metab (Lond) 8: 10. 
• 
Perlmutter D. 10 Jan 2022. Podcast “Coping with Alzheimer’s Impact on Loved Ones – with Patti Davis. EP 141. 
https://omny.fm/shows/the-empowering-neurologist-podcast/coping-with-alzheimers-impact-on-loved-ones-with-
p . Accessed 14 June 2023. 
• 
Ritchie K et al. Caffeine, cognitive functioning, and white matter lesions in the elderly: establishing causality from 
epidemiological evidence. J. Alzheimer Dis. 20(Suppl 1), S161–S166 (2010). 
• 
Ross GW, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Morens DM, Grandinetti A, Tung KH, et al. (2000). Association of coffee and 
caffeine intake with the risk of Parkinson disease. JAMA 283, 2674–2679.  
• 
Rysz J, Franczyk B, Rysz-Górzyńska M, Gluba-Brzózka A. Ageing, Age-Related Cardiovascular Risk and the 
Beneficial Role of Natural Components Intake. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021;23:183.  
• 
Shukitt-Hale B, Miller MG, Chu YF, Lyle BJ, Joseph JA (2013) Coffee, but not caffeine, has positive effects on 
cognition and psychomotor behavior in aging. Age (Dordr) 35: 2183–2192. 
• 
Sitkovsky MV, Lukashev D, Apasov S, Kojima H, Koshiba M, Caldwell C, Ohta A, Thiel M (2004). Physiological control 
of immune response and inflammatory tissue damage by hypoxia-inducible factors and adenosine A2A receptors. 
Ann. Rev. Immunol., 22, 657–682. 
• 
Solinas M, Ferré S, You ZB, Karcz-Kubicha M, Popoli P, Goldberg SR. (2002). Caffeine induces dopamine and 
glutamate release in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. The Journal of Neuroscience. 22 (15): 6321–24. 
• 
Sridhar GR, Lakshmi G, Nagamani G. Emerging links between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer's disease. 
World J Diabetes. 2015;6(5):744-751. 
• 
Tao l, Wei Z, Zhang Y, Zhang M, Zhang Y, Niu X, Zhao Q, Liu Z, Li Y, Diao A (2021) Caffeine promotes the expression 
of telomerase reverse transcriptase to regulate cellular senescence and aging. Food & Function; Feb. 
• 
Trinh, K., Andrews, L., Krause, J., Hanak, T., Lee, D., Gelb, M.,et al. (2010). Decaffeinated coffee and nicotine-free 
tobacco provide neuroprotection in Drosophila models of Parkinson’s disease through an NRF2-dependent 
mechanism. J. Neurosci. 30, 5525–5532. 
• 
University Health Network. "Drinking coffee may reduce your chances of developing Alzheimer's, 
Parkinson's." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 5 November 2018. 
<www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/11/181105160825.htm>. 

 
 
Page | 16 
 
• 
Venugopal R, Jaiswal, AK (1996). Nrf1 and Nrf2 positively and c-Fos and Fra1 negatively regulate the human 
antioxidant response element-mediated expression of NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 93, 14960–14965. 
• 
Viana AL, Fonseca M, Meireles EL, Duarte SM, Rodrigues MR, et al. (2012) Effects of the consumption of caffeinated 
and decaffeinated instant coffee beverages on oxidative stress induced by strenuous exercise in rats. Plant Foods 
Hum Nutr 67: 82–87. 
• 
Watson, E. J., Kohler, M., Banks, S. & Coates, A. M. Validation and reproducibility of an Australian caffeine food 
frequency questionnaire. Int J. Food Sci. Nutr. 68, 617–626 (2017). 
• 
Wu L, Sun D, He Y (2017) Coffee intake and the incident risk of cognitive disorders: A dose-response meta-analysis 
of nine prospective cohort studies. Clin Nutr 36, 730–736. 
• 
Yanagimoto K, Ochi H, Lee KG, Shibamoto T (2004). Antioxidative activities of fractions obtained from brewed 
coffee. J Agric Food Chem. Feb 11;52(3):592-6. 
• 
Zeisberg M, Yang C, Martino M, Dunca M, Rieder F, Tanjore H, Kalluri R (2007). Fibroblasts derive from hepatocytes 
in liver fibrosis via epithelial to mesenchymal transition. J. Biol. Chem., 282, 23337–23347. 
• 
Zeli C, Lombardo M, Storz MA, Ottaviani M, Rizzo G. Chocolate and Cocoa-Derived Biomolecules for 
Brain Cognition during Ageing. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022;11(7):1353. Published 2022 Jul 12.  
 
