1 | P a g e
Coffee & Liver Health: 
Literature Review  
2023 
Liver disease is a silent killer as often there are no symptoms until it's too late. 
Coffee is something that is easily accessible to everyone and regularly drinking 
it — filtered, instant, or espresso — may make a difference in preventing and, 
in some cases, slowing down the progression of liver disease— it is an easy 
lifestyle choice to make." 
-
Judi Rhys, Chief Executive of the British Liver Trust
(MedicalNewsToday.com) 
INTRODUCTION 
Our vision at Purity Coffee is to improve the world’s health through coffee.  This year at Purity as we continue 
our research on coffee and health, we wanted to dive deeper into liver health because liver diseases impact 
millions of people worldwide, reducing quality of life and causing illness and death:   
•
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis in the U.S. effects about 4.5 million people (CDC).
•
Alcoholic liver disease effects millions of people who drink moderately to heavily.
•
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects a quarter of the population, but has no approved drug 
therapy.  [Side note: The term metabolic (dysfunction) associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) a more 
accurate term adopted 2020.] (Eslam 2020).
•
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) can affect those with diabetes and obesity.
•
Chronic hepatitis B infection impacts over 300 million people worldwide (Chopra 2001).
•
Hepatitis C can go undiagnosed for years; however, when symptoms do appear, they often are a sign of 
advanced liver disease (CDC).
Over the last two decades there is mounting evidence for a positive effect of coffee on liver function 
and liver health. The studies range from reports on coffee reducing risk of cirrhosis and liver cancer to 
demonstrating evidence for coffee as a beneficial tonic across the spectrum of liver diseases. Several 
studies consistently show that coffee drinkers with chronic liver disease have a reduced risk of cirrhosis 
and a lower incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma regardless of primary etiology. Epidemiological 
studies strongly suggest that drinking about 3 cups of coffee can reduce the risk or severity of liver 
damage from various causes (Heath 2017).
Elevated liver enzymes often indicate inflammation or damage to liver cells, which then leak higher than 
normal amounts of certain chemicals into the bloodstream, elevating liver enzymes on blood tests.  
Coffee consumption is inversely related to serum liver enzyme activity: Results showed that people who 
said they drank three or more cups of coffee a day had lower levels of these enzymes, compared with 
people who did not drink any coffee. (Casiglia 1993, Tanaka 1998).  

 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
 A 2010 review of over 500 papers relating the consumption of coffee to cancer of various summarized 
the findings of the meta analyses and recent papers on site-specific human cancers among coffee 
consumers. For hepatocellular and endometrial cancers, there appears to be a strong and consistent 
protective association (Arab 2010). 
This literature review will highlight numerous studies on coffee and liver issues.  There are two main ways 
scientists have studied coffee and its effects on the liver:  Through experiments on laboratory animals and 
through observational studies.  
It is important to note that many studies on coffee consumption are observational. In these studies, disease 
incidence is often associated with multiple factors, so scientists try and record everything from lifestyle choices, 
diet, level of exercise, genetics, and even geography when possible. These studies are powerful because they 
cover large populations and have impressive results, and in order for them to be published in some of the best 
medical journals in the world, they must first make it through the rigorous scientific peer review process. The aim 
of peer reviewing is to provide an unbiased, independent, and critical assessment of submitted manuscripts. It is 
a strong safety for the scientific community and the public alike. Any study that is finally published in an 
academic, peer-reviewed medical journal has been vetted by multiple experts.  In 2013 Saab et. al. published a 
systematic review that included a table of 12 key studies (over 93,000 subjects) assessing impact of coffee on 
liver related health outcomes from 1993 to 2010, all of which showed positive health benefits of coffee on the 
liver. 
As usual with Purity’s research, we look at components of coffee other than caffeine that influence health—in 
this case the reduction in risk of liver disorders and diseases.  Coffee, after all, is much more than just caffeine, 
especially when it comes to health. Coffee is a complex blend of compounds, the amounts of which depend on 
the coffee quality.  Quality is determined by type of coffee (arabica or robusta), cultivar, handling and processing 
from farm to country of consumption, how it is roasted (degree of roasting, type of roaster used, etc.), when and 
how it is ground, and finally how it is brewed.   
 
Very few of the studies were able to explain any of these factors, and they did not always explain what “a cup of 
coffee” is, or they stated that it ranged in type and brew.  A “cup of coffee” to many westerners might be about 
200 ml (about 6.7 fl. oz.) brewed using about 12-13 grams of coffee, a paper filter and about 4 minutes steep 
time… that’s a little strong for some people, but many studies are from other countries, where coffee is stronger 
and may not be filtered with paper.  The effects of preparation techniques on the antioxidant capacity of coffee 
brews is impactful, as studied by Komes and Belščak-Cvitanović in 2014 (mentioned in the section on cafestol 
later in this paper). 
 
 
 

 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
GLOSSARY OF LIVER TERMS AND BASIC FUNCTIONS 
- 
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST): Enzymes produced mainly 
in the liver are important to amino acid 
metabolism and used as biomarkers for liver 
health. When the liver is damaged, ALT is released 
into the bloodstream and levels increase. An 
increase in AST levels may indicate liver damage, 
disease or muscle damage. (MayoClinic.org). 
- 
Albumin: Globular protein produced by the liver 
that helps control fluid in the blood and tissues. 
- 
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP/ALK-PHOS): Enzyme 
produced in the bile ducts and other locations 
plays an integral role in metabolism within the liver 
and is used as a biomarker in diagnosing liver 
diseases. 
- 
Bile: The greenish-yellow fluid produced by the 
liver containing bile salts, bilirubin and cholesterol, 
stored and concentrated in the gallbladder, then 
sent to the duodenum after eating. 
- 
Bile acids: Steroid acids found in bile that can be 
converted into bile salts with taurine or glycine 
residues. 
- 
Biliary tract: The system of tubes that carry bile 
from the liver and gall bladder and drain into the 
intestine. 
- 
Bilirubin: Produced during the normal breakdown 
of red blood cells, it passes through the liver and is 
ultimately excreted out of the body. Higher than 
normal levels of bilirubin may indicate different 
types of liver or bile duct problems. This yellow 
compound’s main physiologic role is as a cellular 
antioxidant, particularly important in the brain, 
where it scavenges superoxide, preventing 
excitotoxicity and neuronal death (Sedlak 2009). It 
travels in the bloodstream to the liver where it has 
sugar added and becomes conjugated bilirubin.  
- 
Cholangitis: Inflammation or infection of bile ducts 
which can cause poor bile flow from the liver and 
cause liver damage. 
- 
Chronic Hepatitis: Inflammation of the liver that 
lasts over a period of time.  
- 
Cirrhosis: Scarring of the liver when liver cells are 
damaged and destroyed by diseases. Scarring can 
stop blood flowing through the liver properly 
leading to further damage. The liver becomes 
smaller, hardens and can’t function properly. 
Cirrhosis cannot be reversed. 
- 
Fibrosis: Scar tissue from pathological healing 
which replaces normal tissue with connective 
tissue and eventually becomes cirrhosis as it 
impairs liver function. 
- 
Fulminant: a severe, sudden form of liver failure. 
More commonly known as acute liver failure. 
- 
Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase (also known as 
Gamma Glutamyl transpeptidase (Gamma GT 
(GGT)): an enzyme produced mostly by the bile 
ducts. 
- 
Gastroenterology: The study of the digestive 
system. 
- 
Heme: Biosynthesized in the liver and bone 
marrow, heme precedes hemoglobin (required to 
bind oxygen to blood) and produces biliverdin (bile 
pigment). 
- 
Hepatic: Referring to the liver. 
- 
Hepatic artery: The blood vessel that brings blood 
with oxygen to the liver. 
- 
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs): Found in the space of 
Disse, between hepatocytes and sinusoidal 
endothelial cells, and are responsible for producing 
the majority of the extracellular matrix (ECM). HSCs 
recruit inflammatory and immune cells by 
producing specific cytokines and chemokines. 
- 
Hepatic vein: The blood vessel that moves blood 
away from the liver. 
- 
Hepatitis:  Viruses A through G cause liver 
inflammation, which may destroy liver cells. 
- 
Hepatocytes:  The main functional cells of the liver 
that perform a multitude of metabolic, endocrine 
and secretory functions. 
- 
Hepatology: The study of the liver. 
- 
Jaundice: A high level of bilirubin in the blood 
leading to the yellowing of the skin and/or the 
whites of the eyes.

 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
DISEASES AND COFFEE’S IMPACT 
FIBROSIS  
There are an overwhelming number of studies that conclude that coffee drinking reduces liver fibrosis (please 
see bibliography).  These studies avoid the mistakes of mid-century research into coffee:  They adjust for 
confounding factors, like cigarette smoking and lifestyle issues.   
Liver fibrosis results from chronic damage; eventually, the ability of the liver to regenerate fails, and 
hepatocytes are replaced by extracellular matrix (ECM).  Fibrosis disorganizes the architecture of the liver 
anatomically and functionally, which is a characteristic of most types of chronic liver diseases. Under normal 
conditions of wound healing, tissues are replaced without cellular overgrowth, but injury to the liver from 
inflammation to physical disturbances or injury can lead to excessive connective tissue formation.  Repair 
happens in a sequence that produces an inflammatory response with numerous actions involving neutrophils, 
macrophages, lymphocytes and leukocytes, the last one producing cytokines that trigger the proliferation of 
capillary production, fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells.  If the liver is more severely damaged with a longer 
inflammatory response, the tissue reconstruction (fibrotic process) can include an excessive amount of 
extracellular matrix (ECM), which ends up as scar tissue and fibrosis. The fibrotic cytokines and hepatic stellate 
cells (HSCs) are considered the key reason for this fibrous overgrowth, and coffee has been shown to block 
these effects by acting at various points of the pathological processes mentioned above (Farah 2019, V.1, p. 
215). The main injuries to the liver that produce hepatic fibrosis include chronic hepatitis C or B infections, 
alcohol abuse, cholestasis, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.   
Researchers have found that advanced liver fibrosis from chronic liver diseases (CLDs) of various etiologies is 
associated with low coffee and total caffeine consumption. Demonstrating the clinical significance of coffee 
consumption, Freedman et al. found that among patients with advanced fibrosis, those who consumed no 
coffee had a risk of hepatic decompensation or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) of 11.1 per 100 patient-years, 
compared to just 6.3 per 100 patient-years in those consuming at least three cups of coffee per day, with no 
beneficial effect noted with tea or other sources of caffeine (Freedman 2009).  
Coffee exerts protective effects against liver fibrosis through antioxidant action and the suppression of 
fibrogenic cytokines (that trigger ECM growth), TGF-β (a regulator of immune cells) and PDGF-β (an important 
regulator of cell growth, proliferation, and formation of blood vessels). Among many antioxidative and 
hepatoprotective components in coffee, chlorogenic acids and other polyphenols have been suggested as 
relevant compounds due to their noteworthy levels in coffee (Farah 2019, Farah 2013, Farah 2006). These 
findings indicated that other components besides caffeine are involved in the hepatoprotective effects of 
coffee against liver fibrosis (Shin 2009). 
Coffee has been shown to limit the progression of liver fibrosis in established liver disease (Shin 2010, Modi 
2010, Shi 2009), and has been associated with reduced hepatic fibrosis in patients with liver diseases like 
hepatitis C (Molloy 2011).  However, in 2017 a group of researchers in the Netherlands studied coffee’s effect 
on liver fibrosis which was not severe enough to present definite or readily observable symptoms yet. They 
evaluated whether coffee had an association with liver stiffness in over 2400 individuals from the general 
population, and found that frequent coffee consumption reduced liver stiffness, but not necessarily steatosis 
(fatty liver).  However, they concluded in the end that coffee consumption might still be useful to prevent 
progression to more advanced stages, such as inflammation and fibrosis (Alferink 2017). 
The most impressive evidence came in 2015 with a meta-analysis that included 4 cross-sectional and 2 case-
control studies with over 20,000 patients that showed that regular coffee consumption significantly reduces 

 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
rates and severity of hepatic fibrosis in patients with liver disease. Caffeine itself was not significantly 
associated with the results, but regular coffee (naturally caffeinated) intake was significantly associated with 
reduced hepatic fibrosis.  In some cases, depending on the degree, hepatic fibrosis could be reversed, and the 
liver could return to a normal structure. Coffee consumption can reduce the severity of fibrosis and may 
contribute to the repair of liver tissue. Coffee caffeine is associated with a significant reduction in the risk of 
fibrosis among patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (Shen 2015). The scientists recommended, “Given 
the potential benefits of regular coffee, patients with NAFLD should be encouraged to consume regular coffee 
daily.” 
Progression of liver injury from fibrosis to cirrhosis is a slow and terminal process.  Fatty liver disease and 
hepatitis C have caused an increase in the number of patients with fibrosis and cirrhosis over the past decade, 
and a simple, cost-effective mechanism to slow down the process seems to be readily available:  Coffee.  Even 
better:  Good quality, organic, clean, mycotoxin-free coffee. Aflatoxins in particular are hepatocarcinogenic in 
humans, especially in conjunction with chronic hepatitis B virus infection (Wild 2010), so consuming coffee that 
is free of toxins is also critical to a healthy liver.  
METABOLIC ASSOCIATED FATTY LIVER DISEASE (MAFLD) 
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has been a term used for decades, but in 2019 an international 
consensus panel presented new terminology to better reflect its causes: Metabolic associated fatty liver 
disease [MAFLD].  We will use the two interchangeably for this review, because the vast body of literature 
refers to it as NAFLD. 
MAFLD is a condition characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver, and is the most common liver disease 
globally with estimates at close to a billion people having a degree of the disease.  “NAFLD is associated with 
many metabolic comorbidities, including obesity, type II diabetes, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome. Its 
potential to develop into more severe liver conditions, such as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, advanced fibrosis, 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, can lead to a state in which liver transplantation is the only treatment 
option available” (Chalasani 2012).   
Because MAFLD is so pervasive, scientists turned their attention to the epidemiological and clinical evidence of 
the past 20 years that indicated coffee’s potential hepatoprotective effects, including antioxidative, anti-
inflammatory, and antifibrotic activity.  A 2013 study conducted a systematic review of the epidemiology, 
magnitude, and mechanisms of possible beneficial effects of coffee consumption in patients with NAFLD using 
12 detailed prior studies: 
 Four continuous cycles of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES, USA 2001–
2008) were used to investigate the effects of dietary behavior in NAFLD patients. Taking into account 
diet, nutrition, demographics, and other factors, findings showed a strong association between coffee 
consumption and protection against the development of NAFLD (Birerdinc 2012). 
 In an Italian study, 137 NAFLD cases and 108 controls were enrolled, and coffee intake was 
determined by the absolute number of cups of coffee consumed. When compared with non-coffee 
drinkers, those who consumed coffee had less severe fatty liver evaluated by ultrasound “bright liver 
score”. Bright Liver Score (BLS) is the observation of a bright liver echo pattern on ultrasound-- it is 
considered a sign of hepatic steatosis and provides accurate and reliable detection of moderate-
severe fatty liver. 
 In a histological examination of liver biopsies using a questionnaire, researchers reported a strong 
inverse relationship between caffeine consumption and hepatic fibrosis, associating caffeine 
consumption with both the prevalence and severity of MAFLD (Molloy 2012).  

 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
More recently, coffee is associated with a significant reduction in the risk of fibrosis among non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH) patients (Kopzhassaruly 2020). NASH is the most severe form of metabolic-associated 
fatty liver disease and is closely related to obesity, pre-diabetes, and diabetes. As with other studies, they 
showed dose-related results-- that those who drank 2-4 cups per day showed a significant difference to those 
who drank 1 cup per day.   
In 2020, Alessio Calabrò et. al. conducted a literature review on coffee and MAFLD/NAFLD, and they summed 
up the beneficial effects of coffee consumption reported in dozens of papers, highlighting 7 key studies since 
2014. These studies showed that coffee consumption in patients with NAFLD can be protective against liver 
steatosis, progression of fibrosis and liver damage, primarily through antioxidant activity and coffee caffeine 
intake, which improves insulin resistance and reduces the production of inflammatory and fibrogenic cytokines. 
Although the researchers found some controversy due to a lack of information on types of coffee, dosages, 
etc., they concluded that 2-3 cups of coffee a day in patients with MAFLD should be encouraged.  
 
CIRRHOSIS 
Cirrhosis is a late-stage liver disease in which healthy liver tissue is replaced with scar tissue and the liver is 
permanently damaged. Scar tissue keeps your liver from working properly. Many types of liver diseases and 
conditions injure healthy liver cells, causing cell death and inflammation (my.clevelandclinic.org). Cirrhosis 
always develops because of another liver problem or disease:  alcohol abuse, nonalcoholic (or metabolic-
associated) fatty liver disease, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, certain autoimmune diseases, and other causes. Cirrhosis 
isn't curable, but it's treatable. Doctors have two main goals in treating this disease: Stop the damage to your 
liver, and prevent complications. 
For several decades, researchers have been making connections between liver health and coffee consumption.  
Data collected from 1978-1985, supported the hypothesis that there were ingredients in coffee that protect 
the liver against cirrhosis, especially alcoholic cirrhosis. A 10-year study of 128,934 patients hospitalized with 
cirrhosis carried out by Klatsky et. al. (1992) showed that coffee intake was associated with a lower prevalence 
of cirrhosis. In addition, coffee consumption seemed to help prevent death from cirrhosis.  
Ten years later in a study of more than 700 individuals, a relationship was observed between how much coffee 
was consumed per day and the risk of liver cirrhosis. The odds ratio1 for liver cirrhosis decreased for each cup 
of coffee:   
- 
From 1.0 for those who did not drink coffee to 0.47 for those who consumed 1 cup of coffee daily,  
- 
0.23 for consumers of 2 cups,  
- 
0.21 for 3 cups, and  
- 
0.16 for 4 cups  
Was it just the caffeine in coffee that caused this?  The team studied other beverages that had caffeine, and 
compared those with the risk of liver cirrhosis, and they found that caffeine alone was not significantly 
associated with lower cirrhosis risk. These findings support the hypothesis that coffee, but not other beverages 
 
 
1 An odds ratio (OR) is a measure of association between an exposure and an outcome. The OR represents the odds that an outcome will 
occur given a particular exposure, compared to the odds of the outcome occurring in the absence of that exposure.  
OR=1 Exposure does not affect odds of outcome. 
OR>1 Exposure associated with higher odds of outcome.   
OR<1 Exposure associated with lower odds of outcome. 

 
 
5 | P a g e  
 
containing caffeine, may inhibit the onset of alcoholic and nonalcoholic liver cirrhosis— and there must be 
something else in the coffee (Corrao 2001). 
 
The following year, in a study of 101 cirrhosis patients (with more than 1500 control subjects), the risk among 
coffee drinkers showed a significant reduction in cirrhosis (the odds ratio was 0.54) compared with individuals 
who never drank coffee. Similar to the previous study, for those drinking more than 3 cups/day there was a 
significant trend for lower cirrhosis risk with an odds ratio of 0.29. Repeating assumptions from the previous 
study, the consumption of other caffeine-containing beverages did not reduce the occurrence of cirrhosis. The 
researchers followed up a few years later and continued to find evidence for the beneficial role of coffee 
consumption on reduced risk of death from liver cirrhosis. The mortality rate of people who drank 3 or more 
cups of coffee was lower than those who drank 2 cups of coffee or less (Tverdal 2003).  
 
The correlation was also valid for alcoholic cirrhosis as well as cirrhosis from other causes, which was different 
from the study from the 1990s. There also seemed to be a threshold in how much coffee was effective: No 
further decline in mortality when the intake was more than three to four cups of coffee. The meta-analysis 
done by Kennedy et al. in 2016 concluded that an increase in daily coffee consumption of two cups is 
associated with a near halving of the risk of cirrhosis. 
A number of research studies have examined the role of coffee in preventing liver cirrhosis with consistently 
positive and sometimes quite dramatic results. A 2002 study also published in the Annals of Epidemiology 
concluded that there is a 71% lower risk for those drinking more than three cups per day (Gallus 2002). 
Drinking three or more cups of coffee daily lowers the risk by up to 53% of liver disease progression for patients 
with chronic hepatitis C. Black tea or green tea, however, had no effect on liver disease (Freedman 2009). 
LIVER CANCER  
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a type of liver cancer that frequently stems from cirrhosis of the liver or 
hepatitis infection.  It is becoming more common in developing countries and is often fatal. For decades 
scientists have studied the relationship between coffee consumption and the preventive effect against liver 
cancer.  In the 1990s animal experiments showed chlorogenic acids in coffee had inhibitory effects against 
chemical carcinogenesis in liver tissue (Tanaka 1990).   
Researchers found that the subjects with a history of liver disease had a significant inverse relationship 
between coffee consumption and liver cancer. They concluded that coffee might prevent liver cancer more 
effectively among subjects with liver disease than among those without liver disease, but at the same time 
their conclusion stated, “…coffee consumption is significantly associated with a decreased incidence of liver 
cancer.” (Shimazu 2005). 
This was followed with several epidemiologic studies: 
A large-scale study followed 90,000 Japanese subjects over ten years, and in the Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute in 2005 concluded that coffee drinkers have half the risk of developing liver cancer as non-coffee 
drinkers. This effect was recorded for those who drank just one to two cups daily with increasing effect at three 
to four cups. Unfortunately, because decaffeinated coffee is rarely consumed in Japan, they could not make a 
distinction between caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee and could not determine if caffeine were partly 
responsible for the decreased risk of HCC (Inoue 2005).  In a similar study in Italy, where coffee is widely 
consumed, men and women who drink coffee may be reducing their risk of liver cancer, but tea and decaf did 
not appear to share regular coffee's protective effects. Abstainers of coffee drinking resulted in a doubled risk 
for HCC with respect to moderate drinkers (<14 cups/week) (Montella 2007).  

 
 
6 | P a g e  
 
In another 2007 meta-analysis of published studies on HCC, quantitative information on coffee consumption 
from thousands of cases and controlled studies from Europe and Japan (approximately 240,000 thousand 
people, among them 2,260 diagnosed with HCC) had similar conclusions: They observed a 41% reduction in the 
risk of HCC among coffee drinkers compared with never-drinkers. Regardless of study design, geography and 
other bias, men and women who regularly drink coffee have a significantly reduced risk of developing liver 
cancer and other liver diseases, suggesting a continuum of the favorable effects of coffee on liver function 
(Bravi 2007).  
That same year another review of studies that represented hundreds of thousands of cases observed an 
inverse relation between coffee consumption and the risk of liver cancer, and in 6 studies the association was 
statistically significant. Overall, an increase in the consumption of 2 cups of coffee per day was associated with 
a 43% reduced risk of liver cancer, and the odds dropped by 23% with each cup (Larsson 2007). 
Additional large studies were done and showed similar results:  High coffee consumption was significantly 
associated with a reduced risk of HCC in subjects, but was reduced in chronic hepatitis B patients by the 
dominant role of viral replication. They noted that further studies were needed to clarify the protective 
mechanism of specific ingredients in coffee and the possible interaction between coffee and underlying viral 
etiologies in the HCC development among chronic liver disease patients (Jang 2014). 
The relationship between coffee intake and decreased risk of HCC appears to be consistent for several 
etiological types of chronic liver disease, including HCC.  Lifetime coffee consumption is shown to be an 
independent protective factor against HCC. 
In 2020 Bhurwal et. al. did a meta-analysis to evaluate the association of coffee with HCC or liver cancer 
development along with the amount of coffee needed to prevent HCC or liver cancer. They reviewed dozens of 
articles from 1996-2019 that associated coffee with liver cancer, narrowing them down to 20 studies for data. 
Their systematic review showed that drinking coffee provides benefits with a reduction in the risk of HCC or 
liver cancer and higher doses of coffee have higher benefits in terms of risk reduction. 
MECHANISMS OF COFFEE’S IMPACT ON THE LIVER 
COFFEE CAFFEINE 
It is undeniable that many people drink coffee for the effect of caffeine on their wakefulness.  However, in the 
case of liver health, the interaction of coffee’s many beneficial compounds appears to work in tandem with 
coffee’s caffeine.   
Caffeine is an alkaloid found in leaves, seeds, and fruits of coffee, tea, cocoa, cola, and guarana plants. Within 
10 minutes of drinking coffee, the stomach and first part of the intestine absorb the caffeine, and it reaches the 
maximum concentration in the bloodstream within about an hour.  The liver metabolizes the caffeine into 
paraxanthine, theobromine, and theophylline which contribute to enhancing its effects. Caffeine and 
theophylline act as antagonists of adenosine receptors in humans—adenosine interacts with specific cell 
receptors, most noticeably inhibiting neural activity and causing drowsiness, but it performs numerous other 
actions in the body (Nehlig 1992).  
In certain parts of the body caffeine modulates intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 
which regulates immune cell functions, plays an important role in metabolism, and promotes the release of 
insulin from pancreatic beta cells. Upregulation of cAMP inhibits the activation of inflammatory effector cells 

 
 
7 | P a g e  
 
such as T cells. In T cells, cAMP downregulates various cellular functions, including cytokine production and 
cytotoxicity (Setkovsky 1988).  
The anti-inflammatory properties of caffeine are also due to its function as a phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor 
(Horrigan 2006). Phosphodiesterase inhibitors encourage blood vessel dilation and smooth muscle relaxation 
and are used to treat people with pulmonary hypertension or lung issues, sometimes even reversing some of 
the damage to the heart and lungs. More recently, Kreisel, et. al. suggested the use of PDE-5 to treat liver 
cirrhosis (2020). 
The beneficial effects of coffee and caffeine extract against liver fibrosis have been demonstrated by several 
studies using standard rodent models. In almost every study, coffee blocked toxin-induced liver fibrosis and 
cirrhosis.  In one key study using rats, the scientists induced liver disease in the animals and then tested regular 
coffee, decaffeinated coffee and a water-caffeine solution. Regular coffee produced the most impactful 
positive results, showing that it was not just the caffeine that benefits the liver.  “A reduction in hepatic TGF-β1 
expression in the group receiving decaffeinated coffee indicates that caffeine may not be the solely 
hepatoprotective compound in coffee beverages” (Furtado 2012). That said, caffeine seems to play an 
important role against liver injury, since fibrosis and inflammation were lower in the animals receiving regular 
coffee and caffeine.   
CAFFEINE AND TELOMERES 
More recently caffeine has been found to influence telomeres, which play a vital role in preserving the 
information in our genome. Telomeres are DNA–protein structures found at both ends of each chromosome 
that protect the genome from degradation, unnecessary recombination, repair, and interchromosomal fusion. 
Caffeine promotes the expression of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), extending the telomere length 
and preventing cellular deterioration and loss of division/growth capacity. Caffeine has also been shown to 
improve microscopic structural changes of the thymus, spleen and liver due to aging, which helps to clarify 
different ways coffee benefits health in regard to longevity (Tao 2021). 
CAFFEINE AND ADENOSINE 
Research suggests that the protective effect of caffeine may be due to its blocking of adenosine, which is a 
potent internal regulator of inflammation and tissue repair (Chakraborti 2003).  There are four subtypes of 
extracellular adenosine: A1, A2A, A2B, and A3 (Fredholm 2001). Activation of adenosine A2A receptors 
promotes tissue repair, wound healing, and matrix production (Montesinos 1997 & 2002), it reduces 
inflammation and prevents acute inflammatory injury in the liver [Ohta 2001]. In other cell types, adenosine 
A2A receptors stimulate collagen production via mitogen-activated protein (Revan 1996).  
Because of the positive actions of adenosine, in 2001, Ohta et. al. tested the concern that caffeine might 
exacerbate tissue damage if consumed during an acute inflammation episode. They assessed the effect of 
acute and chronic caffeine treatment on acute liver inflammation. Their results showed that the dose of 
caffeine was critical to the body’s reaction:  Caffeine at lower doses (10 and 20 mg/kg) strongly exacerbated 
acute liver damage and increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines. However, high doses of caffeine (100 
mg/kg) completely blocked both liver damage and proinflammatory cytokine responses through an A2A 
receptor-independent mechanism (Ohta 2007).  
Also, at high doses, caffeine inhibits cAMP (see previous page), yet a low dose of caffeine regulates cAMP levels 
through antagonism of the A2A receptor.  In short, the lower doses of caffeine were proinflammatory, which 
would be difficult to deduce from the observational/epidemiological studies.  This is one reason that scientists 
believe it is the caffeine in conjunction with other compounds in coffee (chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, ferulic 

 
 
8 | P a g e  
 
acid, etc.), diterpenes (cafestol, kahweol), and trigonelline, which may exert liver protective effects (Farah et. 
al. 2019). 
 
Figure 2. Beneficial effects of coffee on the liver.  © Calabro, A. et. al.  2020. Open Access is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use and sharing with citation: https://hrjournal.net/article/view/3696  
 
Caffeine supports antioxidant activity, and its catabolic products theobromine and xanthine also have exhibited 
antioxidant properties (Azam 2003).  Fibrosis, cirrhosis, HCC, MAFLD and alcoholic liver disease are all 
connected to oxidative stress, which is an imbalance between the production and accumulation of oxygen 
reactive species (ROS) in cells and the antioxidant system that detoxifies these reactive products. The liver 
metabolizes substances to maintain homeostasis in the organism,  but this process produces free radicals, 
including ROS, which in turn produces more oxidative stress. Antioxidants are molecules that help delay or 
prevent oxidation, fighting free radicals and keeping us healthy. Caffeine is an effective inhibitor of all three 
ROS species (Scalbert 2000). 
CAUTIONARY NOTES ON CAFFEINE 
Habitual caffeine consumption increases CYP1A2 activity, which has implications for the metabolism of various 
medications and the synthesis of cholesterol, steroids and other lipids. Caffeine is an inducer of CYP1A2, which 
is also the enzyme responsible for caffeine's metabolism. On the other hand, drugs that inhibit CYP1A2 activity 
interfere with the metabolism and elimination of caffeine, increasing the risk of its toxic effects. Continual 
consumption of caffeine can lead to tolerance. Because several drug interactions may occur between caffeine 
and medications, patients taking caffeine-containing medicine or coffee drinkers taking drugs that interact with 

 
 
9 | P a g e  
 
CYP1A2 may require dosage adjustments or need to avoid coffee, despite its potential benefits for the liver 
2
(Carrillo 2000).*  
Drug interactions between caffeine and other psychoactive drugs may lead to caffeine-related or medication-
related side effects. For example, the use of ketamine in combination with caffeine enhances its stimulant 
responses and lethal risk, suggesting a potentially toxic interaction, and the interaction between caffeine and 
antiepileptic drugs can increase seizure frequency (Hsu 2009, Jankiewicz 2007). 
Finally, of course, getting good, non-disturbed sleep is also key to liver health and avoiding MAFLD, so there is a 
balance between drinking coffee at the right time and avoiding caffeine at least 8 hours prior to going to bed, if 
it disturbs your sleep.    
CHLOROGENIC ACIDS AND OTHER ANTIOXIDANT COMPOUNDS 
Maintaining homeostasis and health happens from the uptake of various antioxidants from food, and many 
plants we eat produce antioxidant polyphenols. The beneficial effects of coffee may be attributed in part to 
polyphenols and caffeine serving as antioxidants (Farah 2019 V.1, Ch. 9), and the polyphenols in black coffee 
(without milk products) are readily bioavailable, which is not the case with all foods.  
Coffee has a high concentration of chlorogenic acids (CGAs), which is why coffee is considered one of the most 
important contributors to antioxidant intake in many countries, since people drink it daily and often multiple 
times.  There is an abundance of literature on coffee CGAs and their antioxidant activity.  CGAs play one of the 
most important roles in coffee’s positive impact on liver health. 
It is important to mention, though, that the roasting process has a major impact on chlorogenic acids:  The 
darker the coffee is roasted, the more some of the original nine CGAs break down to form CGA lactones (CGLs) 
or quinides during the roasting process.  Lighter roasted coffees are higher in chlorogenic acids, but also higher 
in acrylamide, which may negatively affect the liver, so a balanced approach of a light-medium roast is needed 
for optimum health-roasted coffee specifically for the liver. 
In addition to the organic bases (caffeine and its products) and phenolic compounds (CGAs and caffeoyl 
tryptophan), melanoidins and phenylindanes produce antioxidant activity in coffee.  Melanoidins are what 
make coffee (and foods) brown when roasted, baked or toasted.  Coffee melanoidins may enhance immune-
stimulating properties, serve as dietary fiber, and may contribute to reducing the risk of colon cancer, too. 
More than 300 heterocyclic compounds (which include many biochemicals essential to the metabolism of all 
living things) are also found in brewed coffee. These include pyrroles, furans, thiophenes, pyrazines and 
thiazoles, which exert antioxidant activity, are chelating agents (remove toxic metals from the body) and 
modulate the activity of several enzyme systems, which protect the body against chemical and physical 
stressors (Muriel 2012). 
 
 
 
 
2 These drugs include cimetidine (Tagamet), disulfiram (Antabuse), estrogens, fluconazole (Diflucan), fluvoxamine (Luvox), 
mexiletine (Mexitil), quinolone class antibiotics, and terbinafine (Lamisil). Use of ketamine in combination with caffeine may 
have a potentially toxic interaction, and the interaction between caffeine and antiepileptic drugs can increase seizure 
frequency (Carrillo 2000, Hsu 2009, Jankiewicz 2007). 

 
 
10 | P a g e  
 
DITERPINES: CAFESTOL AND KAHWEOL 
 
Along with caffeine and CGAs, the most cited biologically active compounds in coffee that impact the liver are 
diterpenes, cafestol and kahweol (C&K), which are only found in the lipids of coffee.  Coffee diterpenes have 
exhibited anticarcinogenic and hepatoprotective properties in vitro, they stimulate intracellular antioxidant 
defense mechanisms, as well as a common agent for cancer chemopreventive blocking (Cavin 2002). C&K are 
usually studied and discussed in tandem, since it is difficult to isolate them and kahweol is highly unstable 
when purified, as well as more sensitive to heat, oxygen, light and acids.  These bioactive compounds and their 
derivatives, which are mainly salts or esters of saturated fatty acids (predominant) and unsaturated fatty acids, 
represent approximately 20% of the lipid fraction of coffee, with cafestol accounting for about 0.2%-0.6% of 
coffee weight (Farah 2012). 
Studying diterpenes is one aspect of coffee research where the brewing method has a direct impact on the 
dosage of the compound:  Paper filters trap most of the diterpenes, whereas French press, espresso, Turkish 
and Scandinavian coffee maximize diterpenes.  You can see the oils floating on the surface of your coffee, if you 
reflect the light off of it the right way.  C&K increase blood cholesterol level, which is something that some 
people may want to avoid, since they may indirectly increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases.  If this is the 
case, choosing to brew the coffee with a paper filter using a pourover or drip method will virtually eliminate 
the diterpenes, while allowing the caffeine and chlorogenic acids to still be bioavailable. 
C&K protect against several well-known carcinogens and exert anti-inflammatory actions when studied both in 
the lab and in the body. Different mechanisms appear to be involved in these chemoprotective effects: an 
induction of conjugating enzymes in hepatic tissues, an increased expression of proteins involved in cellular 
antioxidant defense, and an inhibition of the expression and/or activity of cytochromes P450 involved in 
carcinogen activation. In human liver epithelial cell lines, C&K treatment resulted in a reduction of aflatoxin B1-
DNA binding correlated with the enzyme GST-mu, which is known to detoxify aflatoxin B1.  C&K also was found 
to inhibit one of the human enzymes responsible for aflatoxin B1 activation, which helps explain some of the 
anticarcinogenic effects of C&K (Cavin 2002). 
In order for the body to use these diterpenes, xenobiotic metabolism has to chemically convert the lipophilic 
(“dissolved in oils or lipids”) compounds into hydrophilic metabolites (water-soluble compounds that the body 
is more able to absorb).  This process has the effect of reducing the activation of mutagens and carcinogens 
and inducing the detoxification of them (Guzzo 2012).  The principal site of action of these cancer-preventing 
effects is in the hepatocytes. 
SUMMARY 
In summary, the overall trend emerging from the literature review of the past 30 years suggests that regular 
coffee consumption can be a protective factor against the evolution of liver fibrosis and diseases.  
 
“Coffee has a multitude of beneficial health effects. Coffee drinkers have a lower risk of developing 
liver cirrhosis, Type 2 Diabetes, Alzheimer’s Dementia, Parkinson’s and a number of common cancers. 
Not surprisingly, coffee drinkers have lower mortality rates. There is a dose-dependent effect and 
although we do not fully understand the mechanism there is intriguing scientific data.  Coffee drinkers 
have lower levels of TNF alpha and CRP (c reactive protein) and higher levels of plasma adiponectin 
and longer telomeres. I refer to coffee as the magical elixir and I enjoy 4 cups of coffee each day!” 
Sanjiv Chopra MD MACP 
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School 
Author of Dr. Sanjiv Chopra’s Liver Book: A Comprehensive Guide to Diagnosis, Treatment and Recovery 

 
 
11 | P a g e  
 
CITATIONS AND LITERATURE RELATED TO COFFEE’S EFFECT ON LIVER 
 
• 
Alferink LJM, Fittipaldi J, Kiefte-de Jong JC, Taimr P, Hansen BE, Metselaar HJ, Schoufour JD, Ikram MA, Janssen 
HLA, Franco OH, Darwish Murad S (2017). Coffee and herbal tea consumption is associated with lower liver 
stiffness in the general population: the Rotterdam study. Journal of Hepatology;67:339–348.  
• 
Arab, L (2010). Epidemiologic evidence on coffee and cancer. Nutr Cancer; 62(3):271-83 
• 
Azam S, Hadi N, Khan NU, Hadi SM (2003). Antioxidant and prooxidant properties of caffeine, theobromine and 
xanthine. Med Sci Monit. Sep;9(9):BR325-30. 
• 
Bilzer M, Roggel F, Gerbes A (2006). Role of Kupffer cells in host defense and liver disease. Liver Int., 26, 1175–
1186. 
• 
Birerdinc A, Stepanova M, Pawloski L, Younossi ZM (2012). Caffeine is protective in patients with non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther.; 35: 76–82. 
• 
Bravi F, Bosetti C, Tavani A, Bagnardi V, Gallus S, et al. (2007): Coffee drinking and hepatocellular carcinoma risk: 
a meta-analysis. Hepatology 46, 430– 435.  
• 
Bhurwal a, Rattan P, Yoshitake S, Pioppo L, Reja D, Dellatore P, Rustgi V (2020). Inverse Association of Coffee 
with Liver Cancer Development: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Journal of Gastrointestinal & 
Liver Diseases . Sep2020, Vol. 29 Issue 3, p421-428. 8p. 
• 
Cadden IS, Partovi N, Yoshida EM (2007). Review article: possible beneficial effects of coffee on liver disease and 
function. Aliment Pharmacol Ther;26:1-8. 
• 
Calabrò A, Procopio AC, Gualtieri P, Primerano F, Larussa T, Luzza F, Di Renzo L, De Lorenzo A, Gualtieri P, 
Abenavoli L (2020). Beneficial effects of coffee in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a narrative review. Hepatoma 
Res 2020;6:69.  
• 
Carmona-Cuenca I., Roncero C., Sancho P., Caja L., Fausto N., Fernandez M. Fabregat I. Upregulation of the 
NADPH oxidase NOX4 by TGF-beta in hepatocytes is required for its pro-apoptotic activity. J. Hepatol. 2008, 49, 
965–976. 
• 
Carrillo JA, Benitez J (2000). Clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions between dietary caffeine and 
medications. Clin. Pharmacokin, 39, 127–153. 
• 
Cavin C, Holzhaeuser D, Scharf G, Constable A, Huber WW, Schilter B (2002). Cafestol and kahweol, two coffee 
specific diterpenes with anticarcinogenic activity. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2002, 40, 1155–1163. 
• 
Chakraborti S, Mandal M, Das S, Mandal A, Chakraborti T (2003). Regulation of matrix metalloproteinases: an 
overview. Mol Cell Biochem;253:269–85.  
• 
Chopra S (2001). Dr. Sanjiv Chopra’s Liver Book: A Comprehensive Guide to Diagnosis, Treatment and Recovery. 
Pocket Books, a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 
• 
Corrao G, Zambon A, Bagnardi V, D’Amicis A, Klatsky A (2001), Collaborative SIDECIR group. Coffee, caffeine, and 
the risk of liver cirrhosis. Ann. Epidemiol., 11, 458–465. 
• 
Day Y J, Marshall MA, Huang L, McDuffie MJ, Okusa MD, Linden J (2004). Protection from ischemic liver injury by 
activation of A2A adenosine receptors during reperfusion: inhibition of chemokine induction. Am. J. Physiol. 
Gastrointest. Liver Physiol., 286, 285–293. 
• 
De Minicis S, Brenner D (2008). Oxidative stress in alcoholic liver disease: role of NADPH oxidase complex. J. 
Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 23, S98–S103. 

 
 
12 | P a g e  
 
• 
De Roos B, Sawyer JK, Katan M B, Rudel LL (1999) Validity of animal models for the cholesterol-raising effects of 
coffee diterpenes in human subjects. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 58, 551–557. 
• 
Desmet VJ (2009). The amazing universe of hepatic microstructure. Hepatology 2009, 50, 333–344. 
• 
Devasagayam TP, Kamat JP, Mohan H (1996). Caffeine as an antioxidant: inhibition of lipid peroxidation induced 
by reactive O2 species. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1282, 63–70. 
• 
Faist V, and Erbersdobler HF (2001). Metabolic transit and in vivo effects of melanoidins and  
• 
Farah A (2012). Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention. IFT Press, Ch. 2 Coffee Constituents, 22-
58. 
• 
Farah A (2018) Nutritional and health effects of coffee. Lashermes P. (ed.), Achieving sustainable cultivation of 
coffee, Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing, Cambridge, UK., 1-31. 
• 
Farah A editor (2019). Volume 1 - Coffee: Production, Quality and Chemistry. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
• 
Farah A editor (2019). Volume 2 - Coffee: Consumption and Health Implications. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
• 
Farah A, de Paulis T, Moreira DP, Trugo C, Martin P (2006). Chlorogenic Acids and Lactones in Regular and Water-
Decaffeinated Arabica Coffees. Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 374-381. 
• 
Farah A, de Paulis T, Trugo C, Martin P (2005). Effect of Roasting on the Formation of Chlorogenic Acid Lactones 
in Coffee. Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 1505-1513. 
• 
Forrester LM, Nealt GE, Judah DJ, Glancey MJ, Wolf RC (1990). Evidence for involvement of multiple forms of 
cytochrome P-450 in aflatoxin B1 metabolism in human liver. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 87, 8306–8310. 
• 
Fredholm BB, Chern Y, Franco R, Sitkovsky M (2007). Aspects of the general biology of adenosine A2A signaling. 
Prog. Neurobiol., 83, 263–276. 
• 
Freedman ND, Everhart JE, Lindsay KL, Ghany MG, Curto TM, Shiffman ML, et al. (2009). Coffee intake is 
associated with lower rates of liver disease progression in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology; 50:1360-1369. 
• 
Friedman S (2003). Liver fibrosis—from bench to bedside. J. Hepatol., 38, S38–S53. 
• 
Furtado KS, Prado MG, Aguiar E, Silva MA, Dias MC, et al. (2012) Coffee and caffeine protect against liver injury 
induced by thioacetamide in male Wistar rats. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol;111:339-47. 
• 
Gelatti U, Covolo L, Franceschini M et al. (2005) Coffee consumption reduces the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma 
independently of its aetiology: a case-control study. Journal of Hepatol.; 42: 528–34. 
• 
George SE, Ramalakshmi K, Mohan R, Lingamallu JA (2008) perception on health benefits of coffee. Crit. Rev. 
Food Sci. Nutr., 48, 464–486. 
• 
Gressner O (2009). Less Smad2 is good for you! A scientific update on coffee’s liver benefits. Hepatology, 50, 
970–978. 
• 
Gressner OA, Lahme B, Siluschek M, Weiskirchen R, Gressner AM (2008). Activation of TGF-beta within cultured 
hepatocytes and in liver injury leads to intracrine signaling with expression of connective tissue growth factor. J. 
Cell. Mol. Med., 12, 2717–2730. 
• 
Gross G, Jaccaud E, Huggett AC (1997). Analysis of the content of the diterpenes cafestol and kahweol in coffee 
brews. Food Chem. Toxicol., 35, 547–554. 
• 
Gudowska M, Gruszewska E, Panasiuk A, Cylwik B, Świderska M, Flisiak R, Szmitkowski M, Chrostek L (2016). 
"Selected Noninvasive Markers in Diagnosing Liver Diseases". Laboratory Medicine. 47 (1): 67–72.  

 
 
13 | P a g e  
 
• 
Guzzo LS, Perez AC, Romero TR, Azevedo AO, & Duarte ID (2012). Cafestol, a coffee-specific diterpene, induces 
peripheral antinociception mediated by endogenous opioid peptides. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology 
and Physiology, 39(5), 412–416. 
• 
Hayes JD, Ellis EM, Neal GE, Harrison J, Manson MM (1999). Cellular response to cancer hemopreventive agents: 
contribution of the antioxidant responsive element to the adaptive response to oxidative and chemical stress. 
Biochem. Soc. Symp., 64, 141–168. 
• 
He P, Noda Y, Sugiyama K (2001). Suppression of lipopolysaccharide-induced liver injury by various types of tea 
and coffee in D-galactosamine-sensitized rats. Biosci. Biotech. Biochem., 65, 670–673. 
• 
Heath RD, Brahmbhatt M, Tahan AC, Ibdah JA, Tahan V (2017). Coffee: The magical bean for liver diseases. World 
Journal of Hepatology. May 28; 9(15): 689-696. 
• 
Helal MG, Ayoub SE, Elkashefand WF, Ibrahim TM (2018). Caffeine affects HFD-induced hepatic steatosis by 
multifactorial intervention. Hum Exp Toxicol;37:983-90. 
• 
Homan D, Mobarhan S (2006). Coffee: good, Bad, or just fun? A critical review of coffee’s effects on liver 
enzymes. Nutr. Rev. 2006, 64, 43–46. 
• 
Honjo S, Kono S, Coleman MP, Koichi S, Sakurai Y, Todoroki I, Umeda T, Wakabayashi K, Imanishii K, Nishikawa H, 
Ogawa S, Katsurada M, Nakagawa K, Yoshizawa N (2001) Coffee consumption and serum aminotransferases in 
middle-aged Japanese men. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 54, 823–829. 
• 
Horrigan LA, Kelly JP, Connor TJ (2006). Immunomodulatory effects of caffeine: friend or foe? Pharmacol. Ther., 
111, 877–892. 
• 
Hsu HR, Mei YY, Wu CY, Chiu PH, Chen HH (2009). Behavioural and toxic interaction profile of ketamine in 
combination with caffeine. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 104, 379–383. 
• 
Huber WW, Rossmanith W, Grusch M, Haslinger E, Prustomerskya S, Peter-V¨or¨osmarty B, Parzefall W, Scharf G, 
Schulte-Hermann R (2008). Effects of coffee and its chemopreventive components kahweol and cafestol on 
cytochrome P450 and sulfotransferase in rat liver. Food Chem. Toxicol., 46, 1230–1238. 
• 
Huber WW, Scharf G, Rossmanith W, Prustomersky S, Grasl-Kraupp B, Peter B, Turesky RJ, Schulte-Hermann R 
(2002). The coffee components kahweol and cafestol induce -glutamylcysteinesynthetase, the rate limiting 
enzyme of chemoprotective glutathione synthesis, in several organs of the rat. Arch. Toxicol., 75, 685–694. 
• 
Inoue M, Yoshimi I, Sobue T, Tsugane S (2005). Influence of Coffee Drinking on Subsequent Risk of Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma: A Prospective Study in Japan. J Natl Cancer Inst;97:293-300. 
• 
Jang ES, Jeong SH, Lee SH et al. (2013). The effect of coffee consumption on the development of hepatocellular 
carcinoma in hepatitis B virus endemic area. Liver Int.; 33: 1092–9. 
• 
Jankiewicz K, Chroscinska-Krawczyk M, Błaszczyk B, Czuczwar SJ (2007) Caffeine and antiepileptic drugs: 
experimental and clinical data Przegl Lek, 64, 965–967. 
• 
Kenichi Y, Kwang-Geun L, Hirotomo O, Takayuki S (2002). Antioxidant activity of heterocyclic compounds found 
in coffee volatiles produced by Maillard reaction. J. Agric. Food Chem., 50, 5480– 5484. 
• 
Kennedy OJ, Roderick P, Buchanan R, Fallowfield JA, Hayes PC, Parkes J (2016). Systematic review with meta-
analysis: coffee consumption and the risk of cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther;359:562-74.  
• 
Kim JY, Jung Kyung S, Jeong HG (2004). Suppressive effects of the kahweol and cafestol on cyclooxygenase-2 
expression in macrophages. FEBS Lett., 569, 321–326. 
• 
Kim JY, Kim DH, Jeong HG (2006). Inhibitory effect of the coffee diterpene kahweol on carrageenan induced 
inflammation in rats. Biofactors., 26, 17–28. 

 
 
14 | P a g e  
 
• 
Klatsky A L, Armstrong M A (1992). Alcohol, Smoking, coffee, and cirrhosis. Am. J. Epidemiol., 136, 1248–1257. 
• 
Klatsky AL, Morton C, Udaltsova N, Friedman GD (2006). Coffee, cirrhosis and transaminase enzymes. Arch. 
Intern. Med., 166, 1190–1195. 
• 
Komes D,  Belščak-Cvitanović A (2014). Effects of Preparation Techniques on the Antioxidant Capacity of Coffee 
Brews. Processing and Impact on Antioxidants in Beverages, 87–97.  
• 
Kopzhassaruly D, Darzhigenov B (2020). PE-317 : Association of Coffee and Caffeine Consumption with Fatty Liver 
Disease, Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis, and Degree of Hepatic Fibrosis. Korean Liver Association. Publication: 
Spring/Autumn Conference (KASL), Volume 1, 308. 
• 
Kreisel W, Schaffner D, Lazaro A, Trebicka J, Merfort I, Schmitt-Graeff A, Deibert P (2020). Phosphodiesterases in 
the Liver as Potential Therapeutic Targets of Cirrhotic Portal Hypertension. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 21, 6223. 
• 
Kurozawa Y, Ogimoto I, Shibata A et al. (2005) Coffee and risk of death from hepatocellular carcinoma in a large 
cohort study in Japan. Br. J. Cancer; 93: 607–10. 
• 
Lam LK, Sparnins VL, Wattenberg LW (1982). Isolation and identification of kahweol and cafestol palmitate as 
active constituents of green coffee beans that enhance glutathione S-transferase activity in the mouse. Cancer 
Res., 42, 1193–1198. 
• 
Larsson SC, Wolk A (2007). Coffee consumption and risk of liver cancer: a meta-analysis. Gastroenterology, 132: 
1740–45. 
• 
Lawrence T, Willoughby DA, Gilroy DW (2002). Anti-inflammatory lipid mediators and insights into the resolution 
of inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol., 2, 787–795. 
• 
Mahmoud AM, Hussein OE, Hozayen WG et al. (2020)Ferulic acid prevents oxidative stress, inflammation, and 
liver injury via upregulation of Nrf2/HO-1 signaling in methotrexate-induced rats. Environ Sci Pollut Res 27, 
7910–7921.  
• 
Masterton GS, Hayes PC (2010). Coffee and the liver: a potential treatment for liver disease? Eur J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol;22:1277-1283. 
• 
medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320089#Coffee-and-the-liver accessed March 2021. 
• 
Michels KB, Willett WC, Fuchs CS, Giovannucci E (2005). Coffee, Tea, and Caffeine Consumption and Incidence of 
Colon and Rectal Cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst;97:282-92. Gallus S, Tavani A, Negri E, La Vecchia C (2002). Does 
coffee protect against liver cirrhosis? Ann. Epidemiol., 12, 202–205. 
• 
Modi AA, Feld JJ, Park Y, Kleiner DE, Everhart JE, Liang TJ, et al. (2010). Increased caffeine consumption is 
associated with reduced hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology; 51:201–209. 
• 
Molloy JW, Calcagno CJ, Williams CD, Jones FJ, Torres DM, Harrison SA (2012). Association of coffee and caffeine 
consumption with fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, and degree of hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology; 
Feb; 55(2):429-36. 
• 
Montesinos CM, Desai A, Chen JF, Yee H, Schwarzschild MA, Fink SJ, Cronstein BN (2002). Adenosine promotes 
wound healing and mediates angiogenesis in response to tissue injury via occupancy of A2A receptors. Am. Soc. 
Invest. Path., 160, 2009–2018. 
• 
Montesinos CM, Desai A, Delano D, Chen JF, Fink JS, Jacobson MA, Cronstein BN (2003). Adenosine A2A or A3 
receptors are required for inhibition of inflammation by methotrexate and its analog MX-68. Arthritis and 
Rheum., 48, 240–247. 
• 
Moreno M G, Chavez E, Aldaba-Murato L, Segovia J, Vergara P, Tsutsumi V, Shibayama M, Rivera-Espinoza Y, 
Muriel P (2011). Coffee prevents CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis in the rat. Hepatol Int., Jan 25.  

 
 
15 | P a g e  
 
• 
Muriel P, Arauz J (2012). Coffee and Liver Health, in Coffee: Emerging Health Effects and Disease Prevention. Ch. 
7. 
• 
Murillo MM, Carmona-Cuenca I, Del Castillo G, Ortiz C, Roncero C, Sanchez A, Fernandez M, Fabregat I (2007). 
Activation of NADPH oxidase by transforming growth factor-beta in hepatocytes mediates up-regulation of 
epidermal growth factor receptor ligands through a nuclear factor-kappa-B dependent mechanism. Biochem. J., 
405, 251–259. 
• 
Nehlig A, Daval JL, Debry G (1992). Caffeine and the central nervous system: mechanisms of action, biochemical, 
metabolic and psychostimulant effects. Brain Research Reviews, 17(2), 139–170. 
• 
Nemeth ZH, Leibovich JS, Deitch EA, Sperlagh B, Virag L, Sylvester VE, Szabo C, Hasko G (2003). Adenosine 
stimulates CREB activation in macrophages via a p38 MAPK-mediated mechanism. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Comm., 312, 883–888. 
• 
Ohta A., Sitkovsky M (2001). Role of G-protein-coupled adenosine receptors in down regulation of inflammation 
and protection from tissue damage. Nature, 414, 916–920. 
• 
P´erez-Burillo S, Rajakaruna S, Pastoriza S, Paliy O, & Angel Rufian-Henares J. (2020). Bioactivity of food 
melanoidins is mediated by gut microbiota. Food Chemistry, 316 (126309).  
• 
Poisson L, Blank I, Dunkel A, & Hofmann T. (2017). The chemistry of roasting – Decoding flavor formation. In B. 
Folmer (Ed.), The craft and science of coffee (pp. 273–309). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.  
• 
Ramos-Tovar E, Muriel P. Hepatoprotective Effect of Coffee. Farah A editor (2019). Volume 2 - Coffee: 
Consumption and Health Implications. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
• 
Revan S, Montesinos CM, Naime D, Landau S, Cronstein BN (1996). Adenosine A2 receptor occupancy regulates 
stimulated neutrophil function via activation of a serine/threonine protein phosphatase. J. Biol. Chem., 271, 
17114–17118. 
• 
Ruhl C, Everhart J (2005). Coffee and caffeine consumption reduce the risk of elevated serum alanine 
aminotransferase activity in the United States. Gastroenterology, 128, 24–32. 
• 
Saab S, Mallam D, Cox G A, & Tong M J (2013). Impact of coffee on liver diseases: a systematic review. Liver 
International, 34(4), 495–504. 
• 
Sanchez GI, Jimenez EF, Saura CF (2005). In vitro antioxidant activity of coffees brewed using different 
procedures (Italian, espresso and filter). Food Chem. 2005, 90, 133–139. 
• 
Scalbert A, Williamson G (2000). Dietary intake and bioavailability of polyphenols. J. Nutr., 130, 2073S–2085S. 
• 
Scharf G, Prustomersky S, Huber WW (2001). Elevation of glutathione levels by coffee components and its 
potential mechanisms. Adv Exp Med Biol., 500, 535–539. 
• 
Schilter B, Perrin I, Cavin C, Huggett AC (1996). Placental glutathione S-transferase (GST-P) induction as a 
potential mechanism for the anticarcinogenic effect of the coffee-specific components cafestol and kahweol. 
Carcinogenesis 1996, 17, 2377–2384. 
• 
Sedlak TW, Saleh M, Higginson DS, Paul BD, Juluri KR, Snyder SH (2009). "Bilirubin and glutathione have 
complementary antioxidant and cytoprotective roles". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America. 106 (13): 5171–6.  
• 
Shen H, Rodriguez A, Shiani A, Lipka S, Shahzad G, Kumar A, Mustacchia P (2015). Association between caffeine 
consumption and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a systemic review and meta-analysis. Therapeutic Advances in 
Gastroenterology; July. DOI: 10.1177/1756283X15593700. 
• 
Shi H, Dong L, Zhang Y, Yanhua B, Zhao J, Zhang L (2009). Protective effect of a coffee preparation (Nescafe pure 
R ) against carbon tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis in rats. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 29, 399–405. 
• 
Shimazu T, Tsubono, La Vecchia C (2005). Coffee, liver enzymes, cirrhosis and liver cancer. J. Hepatology 2005, 42, 
444–446. 

 
 
16 | P a g e  
 
• 
Shin JW, Wang J H, Kang J K, Son C G (2010) Experimental evidence for the protective effects of coffee against 
liver fibrosis in SD rats. J. Sci. Food Agric., 90, 450–455. 
• 
Sitkovsky MV, Lukashev D, Apasov S, Kojima H, Koshiba M, Caldwell C, Ohta A, Thiel M (2004). Physiological 
control of immune response and inflammatory tissue damage by hypoxia-inducible factors and adenosine A2A 
receptors. Ann. Rev. Immunol., 22, 657–682. 
• 
Sugiyama H, Chen P, Hunter MG, Sitkovsky MV (1997). Perturbation of the expression of the catalytic subunit C 
alpha of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits TCR-triggered secretion of IL-2 by T helper hybridoma 
cells. J. Immunol. 1997, 158, 171–179. 
• 
Tacke F, Luedde T, Trautwein C (2009). Inflammatory pathways in liver homeostasis and liver injury. Clin. Rev. 
Allergy Immunol., 36, 4–12. 
• 
Tanaka K, Tokunaga S, Kono S, Tokudome S, Akamatsu T, Moriyamad T, Zakoujid H (1998). Coffee consumption 
and decreased serum gamma-glutamyltransferase and aminotransferase activities among male alcohol drinkers. 
Int. J. Epidemiol., 27, 438–443. 
• 
Tao l, Wei Z, Zhang Y, Zhang M, Zhang Y, Niu X, Zhao Q, Liu Z, Li Y, Diao A (2021) Caffeine promotes the 
expression of telomerase reverse transcriptase to regulate cellular senescence and aging. Food & Function; Feb. 
• 
Torres DM, Harrison SA (2013). Is it time to write a prescription for coffee? Coffee and liver disease. 
Gastroenterology;144:670-672. 
• 
Tverdal A, Skurtveit S (2003). Coffee intake and mortality from liver cirrhosis. Annals of Epidemiology, 13, 419–
423. 
• 
Venugopal R, Jaiswal, AK (1996). Nrf1 and Nrf2 positively and c-Fos and Fra1 negatively regulate the human 
antioxidant response element-mediated expression of NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. USA, 93, 14960–14965. 
• 
Victor-Vega C, Desai A, Montesinos MC, Cronstein BN (2002). Adenosine A2A receptor agonists promote more 
rapid wound healing than recombinant human platelet-derived growth factor (becaplermin gel). Inflammation., 
26, 19–24. 
• 
Vitaglione P, Morisco F, Mazzone G, Amoruso DC, Ribecco MT, Romano A, Fogliano V, Caporaso N, and D’Argenio 
G. (2010). Coffee reduces liver damage in a rat model of steatohepatitis: the underlying mechanisms and the role 
of polyphenols and melanoidins. Hepatology, 52, 1652–1661. 
• 
Vitaglione P, Morisco F, Mazzone G, Amoruso DC, Ribecco MT, Romano A, Fogliano V, Caporaso N, D’Argenio G 
(2010). Coffee reduces liver damage in a rat model of steatohepatitis: the underlying mechanisms and the role of 
polyphenols and melanoidins. Hepatology, 52, 1652–1661. 
• 
Wild C, Gong YY (2010). Mycotoxins and human disease: a largely ignored global health issue. Carcinogenesis. 
Jan; 31(1): 71-82. 
• 
Yanagimoto K, Ochi H, Lee KG, Shibamoto T (2004). Antioxidative activities of fractions obtained from brewed 
coffee. J Agric Food Chem. Feb 11;52(3):592-6. 
• 
Zeisberg M, Yang C, Martino M, Dunca M, Rieder F, Tanjore H, Kalluri R (2007). Fibroblasts derive from 
hepatocytes in liver fibrosis via epithelial to mesenchymal transition. J. Biol. Chem., 282, 23337–23347. 
 
