Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Physiology & Behavior
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/physbeh
Sip and spit or sip and swallow: Choice of method diﬀerentially alters taste
intensity estimates across stimuli
Cordelia A. Runninga,b,c,d, John E. Hayesa,b,⁎
a Sensory Evaluation Center, College of Agricultural Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States
b Department of Food Science, College of Agricultural Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States
c Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47909, United States
d Department of Food Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47909, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Taste intensity
Psychophysical methods
Spitting
Expectoration
Swallowing
A B S T R A C T
While the myth of the tongue map has been consistently and repeatedly debunked in controlled studies, evidence
for regional diﬀerences in suprathreshold intensity has been noted by multiple research groups. Given diﬀer-
ences in physiology between the anterior and posterior tongue (fungiform versus foliate and circumvallate
papillae) and diﬀerences in total area stimulated (anterior only versus whole tongue, pharynx, and epiglottis),
small methodological changes (sip and spit versus sip and swallow) have the potential to substantially inﬂuence
data. We hypothesized instructing participants to swallow solutions would result in greater intensity ratings for
taste versus expectorating the solutions, particularly for umami and bitter, as these qualities were previously
found to elicit regional diﬀerences in perceived intensity. Two experiments were conducted: one with model
taste solutions [sucrose (sweet), a monosodium glutamate/inosine monophosphate (MSG/IMP) mixture (savory/
umami), isolone (a bitter hop extract), and quinine HCl (bitter)], and a second with actual food products
(grapefruit juice, salty vegetable stock, savory vegetable stock, iced coﬀee, and a green tea sweetened with
acesulfame-potassium and sucralose). In a counterbalanced crossover design, participants (n = 66 in experiment
1 and 64 in experiment 2) rated the stimuli for taste intensities both when swallowing and when spitting out the
stimuli. Results suggest swallowing may lead to greater reported bitterness versus spitting out the stimulus, but
that this eﬀect was not consistent across all samples. Thus, explicit instructions to spit out or swallow samples
should be given to participants in studies investigating diﬀerences in taste intensities, as greater intensity may
sometimes, but not always, be observed when swallowing various taste stimuli.
1. Introduction
In 1901, Hanig showed taste thresholds for sweet stimuli are slightly
lower near the front of the anterior tongue while thresholds for bitter
stimuli are slightly lower on the back of the tongue, a ﬁnding that was
later recapitulated by Collings in 1974. Critically however, all taste
qualities are perceived on each region of the tongue, as shown by both
Hanig and Collings. In the interim however, Boring at Harvard had
misinterpreted Hanig's data, giving rise to the myth of the tongue map,
a myth that has proven to be extremely diﬃcult to extinguish. Still
found in some modern textbooks, this myth erroneously claims humans
taste bitterness on the back, sourness and saltiness on the sides, and
sweetness on the tip of the tongue. Although this myth has been re-
peatedly and consistently debunked (e.g., [1]), it may inadvertently
contain a small kernel of truth, in that humans may experience regional
diﬀerences in taste intensity or scaling of intensity [2,3]. Thus, while all
tastes can be detected in all areas of the tongue (as well as on the soft
palate and in the esophagus), there is some reason to believe that the
intensity of the sensation may vary.
One potential mechanism underlying regional diﬀerences in in-
tensity could be anatomical diﬀerences on the tongue. On the tongue,
tastants activate receptors expressed by taste receptor cells; these spe-
cialized cells are clustered within taste buds located in fungiform,
foliate, and circumvallate papillae. The fungiform papillae are small
mushroom shaped structures on the anterior tongue that contain on
average 1–3 taste buds [4]. The number of fungiform papillae on the
tongue varies substantially across people, but can range into the hun-
dreds. The foliate papillae are long vertical grooves, and humans ty-
pically have 5–7 of these on either side of the posterior tongue [4]. Each
of these papillae may contain close to a hundred taste buds. The last
type of papillae that are important for taste sensation on the tongue are
the
circumvallate
papillae,
which
are
larger
(~2 mm)
circular
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2017.09.011
Received 23 May 2017; Received in revised form 5 September 2017; Accepted 9 September 2017
⁎ Corresponding author at: 220 Erickson Food Science Building, University Park, PA 16802, United States.
E-mail address: jeh40@psu.edu (J.E. Hayes).
Physiology & Behavior 181 (2017) 95–99
Available online 11 September 2017
0031-9384/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
MARK

structures located on the back of the tongue. These papillae each have a
groove around the center circular structure, in which hundreds of taste
buds can be found [4]. Humans typically have about 7 circumvallate
papillae, but this value reportedly can range from 0 (one subject) to 20
[5].
The extremely high density of taste buds in the two types of papillae
found on the posterior tongue (i.e., the foliate and circumvallate pa-
pillae), as well as the presence of specialized saliva in the grooves of
these papillae [6], may help explain regional diﬀerences in taste in-
tensity. However, exposing the extreme posterior portions of the tongue
to taste stimuli is diﬃcult in the absence of swallowing. Consequently,
we hypothesized that instructing participants to spit out a stimulus (i.e.,
a sip and spit protocol) compared to swallowing (i.e., a sip and swallow
protocol) may lead to diﬀerences in perceived intensity of taste.
2. Methods
Two experiments were conducted in a controlled laboratory setting.
Experiment 1 used model solutions to examine sweet, bitter, and
umami tastes under diﬀerent sets of instructions (sip and spit versus sip
and swallow), while experiment 2 used real food/beverage products. In
experiment 2, participants wore nose clips to reduce the chance of
retronasal olfaction amplifying taste intensity ratings, speciﬁcally
during swallowing. For experiment 1, sucrose (Domino® brand, pur-
chased from a retail store), quinine hydrochloride dihydrate (Sigma
Aldrich), monosodium glutamate (MSG, Ajinomoto®), inosine mono-
phosphate (IMP, Ajitide™, Ajinomoto®), and Isolone® hop extract
(Kalsec® 46-122) were dissolved into reverse osmosis water at the
concentrations shown in Table 1. All solutions were allowed to sit
overnight in a refrigerator to ensure they were fully dissolved, and were
brought to room temperature prior to testing. For experiment 2,
grapefruit juice (Ocean Spray® 100% grapefruit juice no sugar added),
instant coﬀee (Folgers® classic roast instant coﬀee crystals), vegetable
stock (unsalted, Kitchen Basics® from McCormick®), sweetened green
tea (Arizona® Zero Calorie Green Tea with Ginseng; which is sweetened
with sucralose and acesulfame potassium) were purchased from a local
retail store. Coﬀee was made at 2% w/w in reverse osmosis water. Two
diﬀerent versions of the vegetable stock were prepared. The ﬁrst was
prepared with 2.00% (w/w) sodium chloride (Morton® iodized table
salt), and the second was prepared with 2.06% (w/w) MSG and 2.11%
(w/w) IMP. For convenience, these will be referred to as salty and
savory broths, respectively, acknowledging that neither is exclusively
salty or savory.
Participants were recruited from the Penn State campus, and elig-
ibility criteria included: between the ages of 18 and 55 years of age,
non-smoker, no food allergies, no history of choking or diﬃculty
swallowing, no known defects in smell or taste and not taking medi-
cation that could alter taste or smell function, and no tongue/lip/cheek
piercings. All participants gave written informed consent, and study
procedures were exempted from Institutional Review Board review by
professional staﬀin the Penn State University Oﬃce of Research
Protections under the wholesome foods/approved food additives ex-
emption in 45 CFR 46.101(b).
Testing was conducted in individual sensory booths under a stan-
dard northern daylight illuminant (5000 K, GE LEDs) located directly
overhead. Compusense® Cloud (Guelph, ON) was used to collect ratings
on a generalized Labeled Magnitude Scale (gLMS). The scale ranged
from 0 to 100, with “No sensation” marked at 0, “Barely detectable”
marked at 1.4, “Weak” marked at 6, “Moderate” marked at 17, “Strong”
marked at 35, “Very strong” marked at 51, and “Strongest sensation
ever experienced” marked at 100. All participants ﬁrst completed a
standardized warm-up of 15 questions about the intensity of re-
membered sensations (see [7], and supplementary data). Six sensations
from the orientation were used to verify that participants understood
the scale and how to use it. These sensations were: “the brightness of the
sun when you look directly into it,” “the brightness of the booth you are
sitting in,” “the brightness of a dimly lit room,” “the loudest sound you have
ever heard,” “the loudness of a conversation,” and “the loudness of a
whisper.” If a participant did not rate the sun > (the booth and a dim
room) and loudest sound > loudness conversation > loudness whisper,
allowing for 5pts of error (on a gLMS without numeric values or feed-
back), then that participant's data were excluded from the analysis
(additional detail below).
Taste solutions and food samples were labeled with randomized 3-
digit codes and were presented in a counterbalanced serving order to
control for position eﬀects. All participants both sipped and spat, and
sipped and swallowed the samples, also in counterbalanced order, with
an enforced break of at least 2 min in between each sample.
Participants were instructed to rinse with water before tasting the ﬁrst
sample, and to rinse with water again during each break. For each,
participants were instructed to “swish sample ### around your mouth
for 10 seconds, then (spit it out/swallow it).” A ten second countdown
time was provided on the computer screen. In experiment 1, partici-
pants rated the sample for intensity of: “Bitterness,” “Sweetness,” and
“Umami (savoriness, meatiness, like broth)”; in experiment 2, they pro-
vided
separate
ratings
for
“Bitterness,”
“Sweetness,”
“Sourness,”
“Saltiness,” “Umami (savoriness, meatiness, like broth)”. Participants were
informed that the samples might not have all of these tastes. For ex-
periment 1, participants were not informed of what the solutions would
contain. For experiment 2, participants were told at the beginning of
the test that they would taste grapefruit juice, iced coﬀee, sweetened
green tea, and several vegetable broths. This was done in experiment 2
to help alleviate potential context or expectancy eﬀects.
For experiment 1, 75 (20 men) participants completed the test. Of
these, 4 failed the check on whether they understood how to use the
gLMS correctly, and 5 did not follow the directions of the experiment.
After removal, this left 66 participants (17 men) in the ﬁnal dataset. For
experiment 2, 69 participants (37 men) completed the test, with 5
failing the gLMS check, leaving 64 participants (36 men) in the ﬁnal
dataset.
Detailed
participant
demographics
are
provided
in
Supplementary Table 1.
3. Data analysis
SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary NC) was used for analysis, and SAS
code is available in the supplementary material. Attempts were made to
generate a linear mixed model, with participant as a repeated eﬀect.
However, these data violated model assumptions for normal distribu-
tion of residuals, even when quarter-root or log10 transformations were
used. Accordingly, non-parametric Wilcoxon Sign Rank tests were used
to compare ratings during the conditions of spit or swallow within each
sample and taste quality. This test was also used to compare the con-
ditions across all stimuli within each experiment, testing for a main
eﬀect of spitting compared to swallowing the stimuli.
Table 1
Concentrations of stimuli.
Sample
Molarity
Percent (w/w)
Experiment 1: Model solutions
Sucrose
0.5
17.12%
Quinine
0.00041
0.0122%
MSG + IMP
0.1 MSG
0.05 IMP
1.69% MSG
1.74% IMP
Isolone hop extract
NA
0.04%
Experiment 2: Real foods
Grapefruit juice
NA
NA
Iced coﬀee (instant)
NA
2% granules in water
Sweetened green tea
NA
NA
Vegetable broth: salty
0.342 NaCl (added)
2.0% NaCl (added)
Vegetable broth: umami
0.121 MSG
0.061 IMP (added)
2.06% MSG
2.11% IMP (added)
C.A. Running, J.E. Hayes
Physiology & Behavior 181 (2017) 95–99
96

4. Results
For experiment 1, an overall eﬀect of condition was observed, with
ratings for the sip and spit samples being lower than the sip and
swallow samples on a gLMS (overall Wilcoxon Sign Rank test for con-
dition: p = 0.0012). However, further analysis reveals this was driven
overwhelmingly by isolone (Fig. 1, p < 0.0001), whose median rating
increased by about 5 pts on the gLMS. A similar trend was also evident
for quinine (p = 0.09). Conversely, neither of the diﬀerences between
spitting and swallowing reached signiﬁcance for sweetness ratings of
sucrose or umami ratings of MSG + IMP (p's of 0.29 and 0.48, re-
spectively). These data are summarized in Fig. 1.
For experiment 2, no overall eﬀect was observed when comparing
all ratings of spitting to swallowing taste intensity (overall Wilcoxon
Sign Rank test for condition: p = 0.27). However, diﬀerences were
observed for individual foods as shown in Fig. 2. The bitterness of iced
coﬀee (p = 0.012) and sweetened green tea (p = 0.035) were greater
when swallowed than when spat out. However, the green tea data
should be approached cautiously, as the median values were below
barely detectable, which makes interpretation of signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in this region (0–1.4) of a gLMS diﬃcult. Still, given the low power to
observe a diﬀerence in such a small region of the scale (as the small
range increases the relative variance), ﬁnding a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
this region may still be notable.
5. Discussion
Present ﬁndings suggest that instructions to swallow or spit out a
sample may interact with speciﬁc qualities when determining taste
intensity, especially for bitterness. Our data agree with other very re-
cent work showing that for some sensations, but not others, swallowing
will result in greater ﬂavor intensity [8].
Early work supports some regional diﬀerences in intensity of, or
sensitivity to, taste sensations. The work originally misinterpreted as
the tongue map [9,10] by Boring showed diﬀerent thresholds for dif-
ferent qualities across oral regions. Further, the slopes of taste in-
tensities varied across the regions of the tongue and palate; in other
words, an intensity of a taste may increase more rapidly in one region of
the tongue compared to another [2]. These diﬀerences in intensity may
have contributed to the robustness of the myth of the tongue map myth,
as the intensities of sensations that are reported are dependent upon the
concentrations used in testing. One potential mechanism for diﬀerences
in spatial intensity of taste may be through diﬀerential density of taste
cells. Circumvallate and foliate papillae, located on the posterior
tongue, although fewer in total number, each contain many more taste
buds than the fungiform papillae, which contain the taste buds for the
anterior tongue [4]. Swallowing presumably increases exposure of a
bolus to the circumvallate and foliate papillae, and thus to more taste
receptor cells. Assuming that number of taste cells correlates with
perceived intensity, then logically the posterior tongue should convey
greater taste intensity than the anterior tongue, and indeed this phe-
nomenon has been reported for umami and bitterness [3]. Other work
shows that ability to identify and discriminate taste solutions is not
equal for all participants comparing just the tip of the tongue to whole
mouth swish and spit stimulation [11], and the patterns observed in this
work follow the logic that stimulating more taste cells would increase
the sensory response (in that case, greater accuracy for whole mouth
compared to tip of the tongue for some individuals). Yet in the current
study, greater intensity of sensation was only observed with bitterness.
Thus, while diﬀerences in number of taste buds regionally is one me-
chanism that could explain greater bitter intensity when swallowing
compared to spitting out stimuli, the reason this eﬀect was observed
only for bitterness in the current study remains unclear.
Another explanation for diﬀerential ratings across regions may be
that some individuals experience localized taste loss on the anterior
potions of the tongue. The chorda tympani ﬁbers that innervate this
tongue region run through the middle ear, and repeated infections or
inner ear surgery can result in damage to these nerves [4,12]. This loss
of taste typically lateralizes to the left or right side, depending on
whether the left or right ear was aﬀected. Yet, individuals are often
unaware of this taste loss, as taste sensation from the rest of the mouth
is adequate or even augmented to mask the loss [13,14]. Nonetheless, it
is possible that individuals with taste loss on the anterior tongue would
Fig. 1. Box and whisker plots for intensity of model solutions: Bars are minimum and
maximum value, excluding outliers; box borders are 25th and 75th percentiles, horizontal
line is median, and circles are outliers. BD: barely detectable (1.4), W: weak (6), M:
moderate (17), S: strong (35), VS: very strong (51), SSEE: strongest sensation ever ex-
perienced (100).
Fig. 2. Whisker plots for intensity of real foods: Bars are
minimum and maximum value, excluding outliers; box
borders are 25th and 75th percentiles, horizontal line is
median, and circles are outliers. BD: barely detectable (1.4),
W: weak (6), M: moderate (17), S: strong (35), VS: very
strong (51), SSEE: strongest sensation ever experienced
(100).
C.A. Running, J.E. Hayes
Physiology & Behavior 181 (2017) 95–99
97

exhibit even greater diﬀerences in intensity between the sip and spit
and sip and swallow conditions, and these individuals could be driving
the overall pattern of responses. However, both of these explanations
(diﬀerential taste bud density or regional taste loss) fail to explain why
the eﬀect observed in the present study was only present for bitter taste.
Previously, several reports have noted substantial diﬀerences in
perceived intensity for swallowed versus expectorated stimuli when
those stimuli contained capsaicin [15,16], the compound primarily
responsible for the burn/pungency from chili peppers. Likewise, work
with alcoholic beverages also assumes diﬀerences for ﬂavor intensity
when swallowing, leading to potential complications with inebriation if
testing multiple samples (see comments following multiple chapters of
[17]). In traditional tasting of alcoholic beverages, particularly spirits
such as scotch, swallowing the beverage is believed to convey a “ﬁnish”
that is not observed with sip and spit method. Thus, to appropriately
compare the ﬂavors of various spirits, swallowing is recommended for
optimal results. Much of the “ﬁnish” could be due to the chemesthetic
warmth conveyed from the ethanol during transit of the esophagus,
however present data suggest diﬀerences in bitterness should also be
considered, as they could also be contributing to this expert (albeit
anecdotal) tasting advice (see [11]).
The idea that taste intensity diﬀerences in spitting versus swal-
lowing may be isolated to bitterness is intriguing, as is the fact that this
diﬀerence was not observed for all stimuli. Very recent work by Pizarek
and Vickers also found that evidence of speciﬁc, rather than general,
increases in ﬂavor intensity for swallowing and not spitting, making
present results even more compelling [8]. Critically, we observed sig-
niﬁcant increases for bitterness when real foods were swallowed, even
when participants were wearing nose clips (in contrast to the Pizarek
study). This suggests any increase in bitterness intensity observed here
was not merely due to increased olfactory input due to retronasal de-
livery of volatiles to the olfactory epithelium subsequent to the act of
swallowing.
Potentially, our ﬁndings for bitterness could potentially be due to
the inherent unpleasantness of bitterness. That is, it could be that a
“halo” eﬀect (or in this case, a “horns eﬀect”) is manifesting as inﬂation
of the bitterness intensity ratings [18]. However, it also seems likely
that such an eﬀect would occur under both delivery conditions (i.e,
quinine is unpleasant regardless of whether it is swallowed or not). For
it to occur diﬀerentially across conditions would require that the bitter
stimuli were additionally aversive when swallowed versus spat out. We
did not directly measure liking for any of the samples here, so we
cannot completely rule out this explanation. Still, we do not believe the
present diﬀerence between sip and spit and sip and swallow is merely
due to the unpleasantness of the stimuli. Notably, the vegetable broth
(either salty or savory) was relatively unpleasant as well, both in our
own personal experience with it, and in spontaneous comments from
our participants. This may be due to contextual eﬀects (broth is not a
beverage, while the rest were), and it was served at room temperature
rather than warm. Despite spontaneous comments from several parti-
cipants, we still did not observe an eﬀect of spitting verses swallowing,
again suggesting this diﬀerence was not merely due some sort of he-
donic dumping. Further, we did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant (albeit small) eﬀect
for sweetened green tea (i.e., a bitter-sweet mixture). As this is a
commercially available product, we feel safe in presuming that it is not
unpleasant, given its' success in the market. Finally, our data are quite
consistent with newly published data from Pizarek and Vickers [8].
They found citric acid sourness and sucrose sweetness were not inﬂu-
enced by spitting versus swallowing, while caﬀeine was more bitter
when swallowed, which is quite similar to our results in experiment 1.
With regard to umami intensity from MSG, results from the two studies
are more mixed: we did not observe an eﬀect of swallowing on umami
intensity from MSG, while they did, but only for the highest of 4 con-
centrations tested [8]. More work is required to clarify this discrepancy.
Nonetheless, it is striking that their most robust eﬀect was seen with
caﬀeine, in agreement with present data. Some of the eﬀect we
observed for bitterness may stem from the cognitive implication of
having to swallow such stimuli, but the quality speciﬁcity, irrespective
of pleasantness, suggests it isn't merely a cognitive eﬀect due to the
aversiveness of bitterness.
Thus, the actual explanation for diﬀerences in bitterness, but not
other taste qualities, when swallowing verses spitting remains unclear.
Potentially, diﬀerences in the saliva of the posterior mouth may alter
the binding of some, but not all, chemical stimuli [6,19,20], which
could also help explain diﬀerences in oral burn in the posterior mouth.
However, this hypothesis remains untested, as the von Ebner's gland
saliva of this region of the mouth is present in extremely small amounts
and is diﬃcult to isolate [20]. Nonetheless, the presence of an eﬀect for
bitterness is particularly worrisome, as many studies use sip and spit
methods to test for individual diﬀerences in sensitivity to bitter com-
pounds (e.g., [21–24]). Further, many of the compounds of interest in
variation of bitterness sensitivity are bioactive, leading to concerns if
participants were to swallow too much. For example, quinine is an
antimalarial, and 6-n-propylthiouracil is used clinically to treat hy-
perthyroidism. The variability in study results attempting to correlate
bitterness intensity with factors such as vegetable intake or liking may
be partially explained by diﬀerences in methodology, including whe-
ther participants spit out or swallow the experimental stimuli. Having
reviewed the literature closely with this in mind, we have discovered
many papers fail to report whether the participants were speciﬁcally
instructed to sip and spit or sip and swallow, or whether the partici-
pants were allowed ad hoc to decide if they wished to expectorate the
samples. Thus, in light of present data, greater detail and clarity in
methods and speciﬁc participant instructions are required to facilitate
comparisons across future studies focused on measurement of perceived
bitterness.
6. Conclusions
Bitter taste intensity was greater when swallowing compared to
spitting out some, but not all, bitter solutions and foods. Other taste
qualities were not diﬀerent under these two conditions. While the
mechanism for this isolated eﬀect on bitterness is currently unknown,
the implication for future psychophysical research or applied sensory
testing is that bitterness may be more accurately measured when par-
ticipants are speciﬁcally instructed to swallow the stimuli. Clearly,
there are situations where swallowing the stimuli is impractical or
unethical (i.e., studies with alcoholic beverages, bioactive pharmaceu-
ticals, etc.). At the very least however, all participants should receive
the same instructions: either spit or swallow, but not a choice to do
either, and this should be explicitly reported to facilitate comparison
and interpretation across studies in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by USDA Hatch Act funds [PEN04565],
and discretionary funds controlled by the senior author. C.A.R. has
received speaking fees and travel expenses from food industry cor-
porations and nonproﬁt organizations. J.E.H. has received speaking,
consulting and travel fees from nonproﬁt organizations, federal agen-
cies, and corporate clients in the food industry. Additionally, the
Sensory Evaluation Center at Penn State routinely conducts taste tests
for the food industry to facilitate experiential learning for students.
None of these organizations have had any role in study conception,
design or interpretation, or the decision to publish these data.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2017.09.011.
C.A. Running, J.E. Hayes
Physiology & Behavior 181 (2017) 95–99
98

References
[1] L.M. Bartoshuk, The psychophysics of taste, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 31 (6) (1978)
1068–1077.
[2] D.H. McBurney, Are there primary tastes for man? Chem. Senses 1 (1) (1974)
17–28.
[3] E.L. Feeney, J.E. Hayes, Regional diﬀerences in suprathreshold intensity for bitter
and umami stimuli, Chemosens. Percept. 7 (3–4) (2014) 147–157.
[4] I.J. Miller, L. Bartoshuk, Taste perception, taste bud distribution, and spatial re-
lationships, in: T.V. Getchell, et al. (Ed.), Smell and Taste in Health and Disease,
Raven Press, New York, 1991, pp. 205–234.
[5] M.J. Zdilla, L.N. Gibson, A.J. Hunt, Sexual dimorphism of human vallate papillae:
an in vivo study of normative morphology, Folia Morphol. (Warsz) 74 (2) (2015)
245–251.
[6] H. Schmale, et al., Perireceptor events in taste, in: D. Chadwick, J. Marsh, J. Goode
(Eds.), Ciba Foundation Symposium 179 - Molecular Basis of Smell and Taste
Transduction, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, UK, 1993, pp. 167–185.
[7] J.E. Hayes, A.L. Allen, S.M. Bennett, Direct comparison of the generalized Visual
Analog Scale (gVAS) and general Labeled Magnitude Scale (gLMS), Food Qual.
Prefer. 28 (1) (2013) 36–44.
[8] A. Pizarek, Z. Vickers, Eﬀects of swallowing and spitting on ﬂavor intensity, J. Sens.
Stud. 32 (4) (2017) e12277.
[9] D.P. Hanig, des Zur Psychophysik, Geschmacksinnes, Philos. Stud. 17 (1901)
576–623.
[10] V.B. Collings, Human taste response as a function of locus of stimulation on the
tongue and soft palate, Percept. Psychophys. 16 (1) (1974) 169–174.
[11] J.F. Delwiche, B.P. Halpern, M.Y. Lee, A comparison of tip of the tongue and sip and
spit screening procedures, Food Qual. Prefer. 7 (3–4) (1996) 293–297.
[12] M. Sakagami, Taste Disorder After Middle Ear Surgery, Int. Adv. Otol. 5 (3) (2009)
382–390.
[13] T.R. Bull, Taste and the chorda tympani, J. Laryngol. Otol. 79 (1965) 479–493.
[14] J.F. Kveton, L.M. Bartoshuk, The eﬀect of unilateral chorda tympani damage on
taste, Laryngoscope 104 (1 Pt 1) (1994) 25–29.
[15] B.G. Green, Psychophysical measurement of oral chemesthesis, in: S.A. Simon,
M.A.L. Nicolelis (Eds.), Methods in Chemosensory Research, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL, 2001.
[16] R.F. Baron, M.P. Penﬁeld, Capsaicin heat intensity - concentration, carrier, fat level,
and serving temperature eﬀects, J. Sens. Stud. 11 (4) (1996) 295–316.
[17] J. Piggott, Alcoholic Beverages: Sensory Evaluation and Consumer Research,
Woodhead Publishing, Philadelphia, PA, 2012.
[18] H.T. Lawless, H. Heymann, Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and Practices,
2nd ed., Springer, New York, NY, 2010.
[19] H. Schmale, H. Holtgrevegrez, H. Christiansen, Possible role for salivary-gland
protein in taste reception indicated by homology to lipophilic-ligand carrier pro-
teins, Nature 343 (6256) (1990) 366–369.
[20] A.I. Spielman, et al., Protein analysis of human von Ebner saliva and a method for
its collection from the foliate papillae, J. Dent. Res. 72 (9) (1993) 1331–1335.
[21] J.E. Hayes, E.L. Feeney, A.L. Allen, Do polymorphisms in chemosensory genes
matter for human ingestive behavior? Food Qual. Prefer. 30 (2) (2013) 202–216.
[22] V.B. Duﬀy, et al., Genetic and environmental variation in taste, Top. Clin. Nutr. 18
(4) (2003) 209–220.
[23] V.B. Duﬀy, Variation in oral sensation: implications for diet and health, Curr. Opin.
Gastroenterol. 23 (2) (2007) 171–177.
[24] J.E. Hayes, E.L. Feeney, A.A. Nolden, J.E. McGeary, Quinine bitterness and
grapefruit liking associate with allelic variants in TAS2R31, Chem. Senses 40 (6)
(2015) 437–443.
C.A. Running, J.E. Hayes
Physiology & Behavior 181 (2017) 95–99
99
