Effect of regular and decaffeinated roasted coffee (Coffea 
arabica and Coffea canephora) extracts and bioactive 
compounds on in vitro probiotic bacteria growth 
Journal:
Food & Function
Manuscript ID
Draft
Article Type:
Paper
Date Submitted by the 
Author:
n/a
Complete List of Authors:
Sales, Amanda; Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Nutrition Institute
DePaula, Juliana; Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Nutrition Institute
Mellinger , Caroline; Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria
Gomes da Cruz, Adriano; Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e 
Tecnologia do Rio de Janeiro (IFRJ), Rio de Janeiro , Food; IFRJ
Miguel, Marco Antonio; Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Microbiology 
Institute
Farah, Adriana; Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Nutrition Institute
 
Food & Function

 
Rio de Janeiro, November 4th, 2019
Dear Editor and referees, 
Please, find attached the manuscript of our study titled “Effect of regular and 
decaffeinated roasted coffee (Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora) extracts and bioactive 
compounds on in vitro probiotic bacteria growth” for submission to Food and Function.
Coffee is one of the most widely consumed beverages worldwide.  In the last decade, a 
number of health benefits have been reported. Among them, the potential as a prebiotic food, 
stimulating the growth of probiotics. As part of the microorganisms that compose the 
beneficial gut microbiota in humans, probiotics are of especial interest because they can also 
be intentionally introduced through diet. 
Despite coffee´s prebiotic potential, only a few studies have investigated the effect of 
the beverage or its compounds on the growth of gut microbiota, and no studies were found 
investigating its effect on the growth of individual probiotic strains of Bifidobacterium spp. 
and Lactobacillus spp.. Furthermore, studies comparing the effect of coffee species, roast 
degree and decaffeination on the growth of these bacteria are scarce and not conclusive. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the effect of coffee species, roast degree and 
decaffeination on in vitro probiotic bacteria growth and to identify the major coffee bioactive 
compounds responsible for such effect. Considering that prebiotics are supposed to selectively 
stimulate the growth and/or activity of intestinal bacteria, the growth inhibition of  
Escherichia coli, which can be elevated in the digestive tract in dysbiosis, was also evaluated.
 Regarding the main results, aqueous extracts of both evaluated coffee species 
promoted the growth of all tested probiotic bacteria (Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG 
ATCC 53103, Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 DSM 13241, Bifidobacterium animalis 
subsp. lactis BB12 DSM 15954 and Bifidobacterium animalis CNCM-I2494), but not 
the growth of E. coli ATCC 25922. Species and roast degree affected coffee’s effect on 
probiotics growth. C. arabica and C. canephora (especially the first) medium roasted 
promoted higher growth compared to dark roasted extracts, in a dose dependent 
manner, except for BB12, which seemed to benefit from dark roasted coffee. 
Decaffeination slightly decreased the probiotics growth stimulating effect of regular 
coffee, probably because of the extraction of bioactive compounds other than caffeine. 
The main compounds responsible for coffees’ prebiotic effect were chlorogenic 
acids and polysaccharides, except for BB12, which seemed to use other components 
Page 1 of 18
Food & Function

such as melanodins as main substrates for (a poor) growth. The different probiotics 
behaviours showed that coffee´s prebiotic effect is strain dependent.
We hope our manuscript is suitable for publication in Food and Function.
Kind regards, 
Adriana Farah
Laboratório de Química e Bioatividade de Alimentos &
Núcleo de Pesquisa em Café -NUPECAFÉ
Instituto de Nutrição
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Tel 55-21-3938-6449/98200-8777
Page 2 of 18
Food & Function

Please do not adjust margins
a.Food Chemistry and Bioactivity Laboratory & Coffee Research Core (NUPECAFÉ), 
Nutrition Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil
b.Brazilian Agricultural Research Coorporation – EMBRAPA Food Technology,  Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil
c. Federal Institute of Rio de Janeiro, IFRJ, Brazil
d.Food Microbiology Laboratory, Microbiology Institute, UFRJ, Brazil.
*Corresponding contributors.
E-mails: afarah@nutricao.ufrj.br; marco.miguel@micro.ufrj.br
  Received 00th January 20xx,
Accepted 00th January 20xx
DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x
Effect of regular and decaffeinated roasted coffee (Coffea arabica 
and Coffea canephora) extracts and bioactive compounds on in 
vitro probiotic bacteria growth 
Amanda Luísa Salesa; Juliana dePaulaa; Caroline Mellinger Silvab;  Adriano Cruzc; 
Marco Antônio Lemos Miguel*d; and Adriana Farah*a 
 The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of coffee species, roast degree and decaffeination on in vitro probiotic bacteria growth, and to identify  
major coffee compounds responsible for such effect. Six C. arabica and C. canephora extracts (regular medium and dark roasted and decafeinated medium 
roasted), and five bioactive compounds (chlorogenic acid, galactomannan, type 2 arabinogalactan, caffeine and trigonelline) were individually incorporated 
into a modified low-carbon broth medium-(mMRS), at different concentrations (0.5 to 1.5% soluble coffee and 0.05 to 0.8mg/mL standard solutions). Inulin 
and fructooligossacharides (FOS) were used as prebiotic references. MRS and mMRS were used as rich and poor media controls, respectively. The growth of 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103-(GG), L. acidophilus LA-5-(LA), Bifidobacterium animalis DN-173010-(BA) and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB12-(BB12), 
as well as the growth inhibition of non-probiotic Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 were evaluated. Differences in growth between mMRS and treatments (∆ Log 
CFU/mL) were compared by ANOVA and Tukey test, and considered when p ≤ 0.05. Overall, after 48h incubation, medium roasted arabica coffee extract 
increased the growth of GG, LA and BA (range ∆ Log CFU/mL = 0.5 to 1.8), while dark roasted arabica coffee extract increased BB12 growth (range ∆ Log 
CFU/mL = 0.9 to 1.7), in a dose dependent manner.  Improved performances of GG, LA and BA were promoted by higher polysacharides and CGA 
concentrations, with better performance for Lactobacillus sp. Coffee and its bioactive compounds did not promote growth of BB12 . Plain caffeine did not 
promote Bifidobacterium sp. growth and limited  the growth of Lactobacillus sp. Regular C. arabica and C. canephora extracts inhibited the growth of  E.coli, 
while the decaffeinated extracts promoted its growth. The present results show that coffee consumption can selectively improve the growth of probiotic 
strains,  thus exerting a prebiotic effect, and show that coffee roasting and decaffeination affect this property and that different strains utilize different 
coffee components to grow.  
Keywords: 
Coffee; 
prebiotics; 
probiotics; 
galactomannans; 
type 
2 
arabinogalactans; 
chlorogenic 
acids; 
caffeine; 
trigonelline
Introduction 
The gut microbiota is highly influenced by major 
environmental factors, such as age, geographical location, and 
life-style, which include diet, physical exercises, exposure to 
antibiotics, and so forth. Among these factors, diet plays a key 
role, modulating the microbiota composition and function.¹ As 
part of the microorganisms that compose the beneficial gut 
microbiota, probiotics, with emphasis in Bifidobacterium spp. 
and Lactobacillus spp., are of especial interest because they 
can also be intentionally introduced through diet and when 
administered in adequate amounts they exert a number of 
health benefits to the host, such as production of short chain 
fatty acids (SCFA), which decreases the luminal pH, stimulating 
the growth of additional beneficial intestinal bacteria, and 
suppressing pathogenic bacteria2,3. Additional benefits are: 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea prevention4, colon 
cancer prevention,5 atopic dermatitis,6 inflammatory bowel 
diseases,7 type 2 diabetes prevention,8 nervous system 
disorders,9,10 among other effects.11
The growth of these and other natural beneficial 
microorganisms in the intestinal tract can be stimulated by 
selective substrates called prebiotics.12 Among the main 
compounds 
recognized 
as 
prebiotics 
are 
inulin, 
fructooligosaccharides 
and 
galactooligosaccharides,13 
but 
dietary polyphenols can also be included in this group of food 
components, given that a large percentage of the ingested 
amount is not absorbed in the small intestine and reaches the 
colon, where they have effects on gut microbiota, modulating 
the colonic composition and function.14
It is well known that coffee is one of the most widely 
consumed beverages worldwide. Since its discovery, it has 
played an important role in the life of many.15 Daily coffee 
consumption can reduce the incidence of a number of 
diseases, such as: type 2 diabetes mellitus, Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's diseases, coronary diseases in general, chronic 
liver diseases, among others.16 Proven benefits have justified 
the inclusion of this beverage in the hall of functional 
foods.17,18  On the same note, a few studies have suggested 
that coffee consumption can stimulate the growth of 
Bifidobacterium spp. and produce SCFA, characterizing it as a 
potential prebiotic beverage,19 mainly owing to its non-
digestible and non-absorbable constituents, more specifically, 
the 
polysaccharides 
galactomannan 
and 
type 
2 
Page 3 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
2 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
arabinogalactan20 and melanoidins,21,22 and to its partly 
absorbable compounds, like the chlorogenic acids.23-25
Despite coffee´s prebiotic potential, only a few studies 
have investigated the effect of the beverage and its individual 
compounds on the growth of human gut microbiota,19,20,23-28 
and no studies were found investigating the effect of coffee on 
the growth of individual probiotic (Bifidobacterium spp. and 
Lactobacillus spp.) strains. Furthermore, studies comparing the 
effect of coffee species and roast degree on beneficial 
bacterial growth are scarce and not conclusive. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the effect of coffee species, roast 
degree and decaffeination on in vitro probiotic bacteria growth 
and to identify major coffee bioactive compounds responsible 
for such effect. Considering that prebiotics are supposed to 
selectively stimulate the growth and/or activity of intestinal 
bacteria associated with health and well-being,12 the growth 
inhibition of Escherichia coli, which is not in this category and 
can be elevated in dysbiosis29, was also evaluated.
Experimental
Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora extracts 
Soluble freeze dried aqueous extracts of regular medium 
and dark roasted and decaffeinated medium roasted C. 
arabica and C. Canephora seeds were produced by COCAM Cia 
de Cafés Solúveis e Derivados, São Paulo, Brazil using the same 
green 
coffee 
matrix. 
They                                                                                              
were added to mMRS medium at 0.5; 1.0; and 1.5 % 
(weight/volume) to mimic concentrations of plain coffee and 
of coffee diluted by digestive fluids. Dissolved soluble coffee 
extracts were sterilized with polyethersulfone membrane 
(PES), 0.22 μm pore size (Syringe Driven Filters, Jet Bio-
Filtration, Guangzhou, China) and stored in sterilized bottles.
Solutions of Coffee bioactive compounds 
Solutions of chlorogenic acid (5-caffeoylquinic acid, 
following IUPAC nomenclature), trigonelline (trigonelline 
hydrochloride), 
caffeine, 
and 
the 
polysaccharides 
galactomannan and arabinogalactan, all from Sigma-Aldrich, 
(Saint Louis, MO, USA), were prepared at 0.8 mg/mL,  
dissolving each compound directly into sterilized mMRS, 
followed by filter-sterilization with PES membrane, 0.22 μm 
pore size (Jet Bio-Filtration). The solution was diluted to reach 
0.4, 0.2, 0.1 and 0.05 mg/mL. 
Controls
Probiotic cultures cultivated in plain De Man, Rogosa and 
Sharpe30 broth (MRS) (rich medium) and plain modified low-
carbon MRS broth (mMRS) (poor medium) were used as 
positive and negative controls, respectively, for probiotics  
growth. MRS broth was comprised of peptone (10 g), Lab-
Lemco (10 g), glucose (20 g) yeast extract (5 g), Tween-80 (1 
mL), K2HPO4 (2 g), CH3COONa H2O (5 g), triammonium citrate 
(2 g), MgSO4 7H2O (200 mg), MnSO4 ∙4H2O (50 mg). In mMRS 
broth, glucose, meat extract and triammonium citrate were 
excluded. 
As prebiotics controls, aqueous solutions of inulin (Inulin 
from dahlia tubers, Sigma-Aldrich) and fructooligosaccharide 
(FOS) (FOSVITA®, Vitafor, São Paulo, Brazil) were prepared as 
previously described for soluble coffee extracts and for 
bioactive compounds solutions, in the same concentrations as 
for the tested compounds.
E. coli cultures cultivated in plain Luria Bertani (LB) 
(Lennox) broth,31 comprised of peptone (10 g), yeast extract (5 
g) and NaCl (5 g) were used as control for E.coli experiments. 
Quantification of chorogenic acids, caffeine and trigonelline 
in coffee extracts
The analyses of nine chlorogenic acids (3-caffeoylquinic 
acid, 
4-caffeoylquinic 
acid, 
5-caffeoylquinic 
acid, 
3,4-
dicaffeoylquinic acid, 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 3-feruloylquinic 
acid, 
3-feruloylquinic 
acid, 
4-feruloylquinic 
acid, 
5-
feruloylquinic acid) and two quinolactones (3-caffeoyl-1,5-
quinide, 4-caffeoyl-1,5-quinide), caffeine and trigonelline were 
performed using a High Performance Liquid Chromatographer 
– Diode Array Detector (HPLC-DAD) system, according to Farah 
et al.32,33 with adaptations, using a reverse-phase column 
(Magic C30, 150 × 2 mm × 5 µm, 100 Å, Michrom 
Bioresourcesinc, Auburn, CA, United States). For the 
chlorogenic acids and lactones, the two-phase LC mobile 
system consisted of 0.3 % formic acid (eluent A) and methanol 
(eluent B). The gradient was programmed to operate with a 
flow rate of 1.0 mL/min, and DAD was set at 325 nm. 
Identification and quantification was performed using external 
standard curves and molar extinction coefficients.32 Peaks 
identities were confirmed by LC-MS and by their UV spectra. 
For caffeine and trigonelline, analyses were performed 
according to the method adapted from Farah et al.,33 using 
HPLC-DAD set to 272 nm for caffeine and 264 nm for 
trigonelline. As mobile phase, 40 % methanol for caﬀeine and 
5 % methanol for trigonelline were used, running at 1.0 
mL/min.32 Commercial standards for chlorogenic acid, caffeine 
and trigonelline were acquired from Sigma Aldrich Chem., USA. 
Gravimetric recovery of polysaccharides after ethanolic 
precipitation in coffee extracts
The measurement of the amount of total polysaccharides 
in coffee extracts was performed according to Miller.34 Dried 
samples were solubilized in water (10 mg/mL) at 70 °C, under 
agitation, until total dissolution. Then, they were added of 3 
volumes of ice ethanol (97 %), strongly agitated and left at – 
20 °C /24 hours. Folowing, samples were centrifuged (9072 g, 4 
°C, 20 min) and the pellet was re-solubilized in distilled water 
and freeze-dried. The recovery rate of polysaccharides, which 
includes also oligosaccharides, was calculated based on the 
mass of the recovered pellet (g/100 g). Determinations were 
performed in six replicates.
Estimation of total melanoidins in coffee extracts
As melanoidins have been also described as potential 
prebiotic compounds in coffee and as they are responsible for 
the brown color of roasted coffee, they were indirectly 
Page 4 of 18
Food & Function

Journal Name
ARTICLE
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 3
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
measured by using the extinction coefficient of coffee material 
at 405nm as described in Bekedam et al.,35 with adaptations. 
Coffee aqueous solutions were prepared by dissolving 0.01 g 
of the lyophilized coffee material in 100 mL of filtrated 
demineralized water. Each solution was prepared just before 
measurement. Absorption spectra were recorded on a 
spectrophotometer 
(Shimadzu 
UV-2700, 
Kyoto, 
Japan). 
Measurements were conducted in triplicate. The specific 
extinction coefficients (Kmix) were calculated using the law of 
Lambert-Beer as follows: Absorbance (-) = Kmix x concentration 
(g/L) x length of light path (cm). According to Bekedam et al.,35 
the use of the specific extinction coefficient (K) was preferred 
over the molar extinction coefficient given that the molecular 
weights of melanoidins are unknown and variable. By using K, 
the concentration parameter used in the law of Lambert-Beer 
is expressed in L/g/cm, which makes it applicable for coffee. 
Bacterial strains and culture conditions
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103 (GG) from the 
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Lactobacillus 
acidophilus LA-5 DSM 13241 (LA), Bifidobacterium animalis 
subsp. lactis BB12 DSM 15954 (BB12), Bifidobacterium 
animalis subsp. lactis CNCM I-2494 (BA), and were stored at -
20 °C in De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) broth (Lactobacilli 
MRS Broth, BD, Difco, New Jersey, USA), with 20% glycerol. 
The non-probiotic Escherichia coli strain ATCC 25922 (E. coli) 
was stored under 5 °C in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) agar (BD, 
Difco). To start inoculums preparation, the probiotic strains 
were subcultured in MRS broth containing 0.05 % w/v of 
cysteine-HCl, at 37 °C, in anaerobiosis (GasPak™ anaerobic), 
for 48 hours. Following, the inoculums were plated in MRS 
agar and also incubated at 37 °C, for 48 hours, in anaerobiosis 
(GasPak™ anaerobic). 
Evaluation of probiotics and E. coli growth inhibition by 
coffee extracts and bioactive compounds solutions
For evaluation of probiotics growth in media containing 
coffee extracts, strains were inoculated in mMRS broth. For 
evaluation of E. coli growth inhibition by coffee extracts and 
compounds, LB broth was used. 
For evaluation of probioti c growth in coffee extracts, 
suspensions from the probiotic strains anaerobically cultured 
for 48h were performed in MRS agar at the logarithmic phase. 
Bacterial cells were suspended in saline solution (0.85 % NaCl, 
w/v) to obtain 1 x 10⁸ colony forming units per milliliter 
(CFU/mL). An aliquot of probiotic cells representing 1 x 103 to 
104 CFU/mL was inoculated into mMRS broth. Following, 1% of 
the mother coffee extract (v/v) (at 0.5 %, 1.0 % or 1.5 %) or 
inulin or FOS solutions was added to each test tube with 
mMRS, and incubated in anaerobiosis at 37 °C, for 48h.
For evaluation of probiotics growth in media containing 
solutions of coffee bioactive compounds, inulin or FOS 
solutions, mMRS broth was inoculated with the same CFU as 
for coffee extracts and the standard solutions were added to 
reach the final volume; dilutions were made at 12-well 
microtitre plates after preparing the concentrated solution at 
0.8mg/mL, as previously described, and then completed with 
bacterial suspension in mMRS broth to reach the final volume. 
Incubation occurred in anaerobiosis, at 37 °C, for 48 hours. For 
colony count, after 48 hours incubation, decimal serial 
dilutions were performed in saline solution (0.85% w/v) and 
10µL of each was inoculated in MRS agar plates and incubated 
in anaerobiosis at 37 °C, for 48 hours. Essays were performed 
in triplicate. Results were expressed as ∆ Log CFU/mL, 
calculated as follows: Final count of colonies in MRS plates or 
mMRS plus coffee extracts/bioactive and prebiotic compounds 
minus final count of colonies in mMRS plates, both after 48 
hours incubation.
In order to evaluate the effects of coffee extracts and 
bioactive compounds on E. coli growth inhibition, the bacterial 
inoculum was prepared by subculturing in BHI agar, and 
incubated in aerobiosis, at 37 °C, for 24 hours. The same 
concentrations of coffee extracts and bioactive compounds 
used in the tests with probiotic strains were used for E. coli. 
Bacterial growth was performed in Luria Bertani (LB) broth, 
aerobically, at 37 °C. After 48 hours incubation, decimal serial 
dilutions were performed as previously described for 
probiotics. Colonies were counted after 24h incubation. Essays 
were performed in triplicate and results were expressed as ∆ 
Log CFU/mL. Final colonies count were performed as described 
above.
Figure 1 contains the schematic presentation of the 
experiments performed in the present study. 
Statistics
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's test was 
used to compare the chemical composition of coffee extracts 
and the count of microorganisms. Additionally, chemometric 
methods, i.e., Principal Components Analysis (PCA) with 
confidence ellipses, Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) with 
Euclidean distance and incremental linkage methods, and 
Partial Least Square Discriminative Analysis (PLS-DA)36 were 
used for identification of the main coffee compounds 
responsible for improved microorganisms growth. Analyses 
were performed using XSTAT for Windows, version 2019.2 
(Adinsoft, Paris, France. Data were auto-scaled prior to 
analyses. Differences were considered significant at 5 % 
significance level.
Page 5 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
4 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
Figure 1. Schematic presentation of the experiments performed for probiotic microorganisms and E. coli growth evaluation, using controls (numbers 1, 2 and 5), regular and 
decaffeinated C. arabica and C. canephora extracts (numbers 3 and 6), and bioactive compounds (numbers 4 and 7) solutions, at different concentrations. BHI = brain heart 
infusion; CFU = colony forming units; FOS = fructooligosaccharide, IN = inulin, LB = Luria-bertani broth; mMRS = low carbom MRS broth; MRS = De Man, Rogosa, Sharpe.
Page 6 of 18
Food & Function

Journal Name
ARTICLE
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 5
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
Results and discussion
Quantification of bioactive compounds in coffee extracts
The content of chlorogenic acids and lactones (hence 
refered to as total chlorogenic acids), caffeine, trigonelline, 
total polysaccharides and reducing sugars in the soluble 
coffee extracts used in this study are presented in Table 1.
The contents of chlorogenic acids were higher in C. 
canephora, while those of trigonelline were higher in C. 
arabica. In both coffee species, the contents of these 
compounds were higher in regular medium roasted extracts 
than in dark roasted and decaffeinated medium roasted 
extracts. Such results were expected and are in agreement 
with previously published data for both C. arabica and C. 
canephora 
species.16,32,37,38 
Chlorogenic 
acids 
and 
trigonelline are thermolabile compounds and roasting 
decreases their amount in coffee, producing volatile and 
non-volatile compounds, including incorporation into 
melanoidins backbone. Furthermore, in decaffeinated 
coffee, 
when 
caffeine 
extraction 
is 
performed 
by 
dichloromethane, which was the case in this study, losses of 
other 
compounds, 
including 
chlorogenic 
acids 
and 
trigonelline, occur.18,32,37,39 The content of caffeine in 
regular soluble coffee samples did not differ with roast 
degree, which was also expected, given that caffeine is a 
heat-stable compound and is not significantly altered 
during coffee roasting.18 Higher caffeine contents in C. 
canephora extracts,37,39,40 as well as residual contents in the 
decaffeinated coffee extracts were expected.32,37
Non-digestible polysacharides (mainly galactomannans 
and type 2 arabinogalactans) are responsible for 60-70% of 
coffee brew dry mass and have been classified as dietary 
soluble fiber.41,42 Lower content of total polysaccharides is 
expected in dark roasted coffees, since they are degraded 
during roasting to form a number of volatile and non-
volatile compounds, including melanoidins.43-48 In the 
present study, the precipitated fraction should also contain 
a small amount of oligosaccharides resuling from molecules 
breakdown during the roasting process49 and simple sugars. 
The polysaccharide contents of C. arabica and C. canephora 
extracts were expected to be similar in both species.18 The 
decaffeination process did not seem to have altered the 
polysaccharides composition of coffee seeds, most 
probably owing to their higher hydrophilicity and lack of 
affinity with the solvent used for decaffeination.32,37 
Melanoidins estimation results are reported in Table 2. 
The value of Kmix provides information on the relative 
amount of melanoidins (Kmix 405 nm) present in the coffee 
extracts.35 It is generally accepted that melanoidins contain 
conjugated systems which result in light absorption 
throughout 
the 
whole 
spectrum. 
Nonetheless, 
the 
wavelength selected for measuring melanoidin is most 
often chosen to be 405 nm, given that other coffee 
compounds do not absorb light at this wavelength.35 Dark 
roasted regular extracts and decaffeinated C. canephora 
extract 
presented 
higher 
melanoidins 
concentration 
compared 
to 
the 
remained 
extracts. 
Table 1. Contents of selected bioactive compounds in the soluble coffee ext racts used in the study (mg/g)
 1CGA and CGL: sum of nine chlorogenic acids (3-caffeoylquinic acid, 4-caffeoylquinic acid, 5-caffeoylquinic acid, 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 3-
feruloylquinic acid, 4-feruloylquinic acid, 5-feruloylquinic acid) and two quinolactones (3-caffeoyl-1,5-quinide, 4-caffeoyl-1,5-quinide);  Decaf: decaffeinated. Different letters 
in the same column indicate difference between values (p ≤ 0.05).
Samples
Total CGA
and CGL1
Caffeine 
Trigonelline 
Total
Polysaccharides 
Coffea arabica
Regular
Medium roast
43.2 ± 0.2b
28.1 ± 0.60a
27.1 ± 0.6a
831.0 ± 0.0a
Regular
Dark roast
28.4 ± 0.4d
26.7 ± 0.40a
24.2 ± 0.9b
306.0 ± 0.0b
Decaf Medium roast
36.2± 0.6c
1.7 ± 0.02b
15.8 ± 0.4c
887.0 ± 0.0a
Coffea canephora
Regular
Medium roast
50.7 ± 0.13a
31.0 ± 1.20a
19.5 ± 0.3dc
852.0 ± 0.0a
Regular
Dark roast
30.5 ± 0.9e
30.5 ± 0.9a
17.2 ± 0.5d
368.0 ± 0.0b
Decaf Medium roast
43.8 ± 1.4b
1.4 ± 0.01b
15.4 ± 0.6c
867.0 ± 00a
Page 7 of 18
Food & Function

Please do not adjust margins
Table 2. Kmix values for melanoidins in the coffee extracts (L/cm/ 
g)
Samples
K405nm
Coffea arabica
Regular medium roast
1.0 ± 0.10a
Regular dark roast
1.3 ± 0.10a
Decaf. medium roast
1.1 ± 0.20a
Coffea canephora
Regular medium roast
1.2 ± 0.06a
Regular dark roast
1.3 ± 0.15a
Decaf. medium roast
1.3 ± 0.15a
         Decaf – Decaffeinated. Similar superscript  letter next to numbers indicate                                  
no difference at 5% significance.
PLS-DA results indicate that the amount of polysaccharides, 
followed by chlorogenic acids and caffeine (variable importance 
of projection-VIP values higher than 1) were determinant factors 
to discriminate coffee samples36 (Table 3). 
Table 3. Variable importance in the projection (VIP), 
considering compositional differences among all tested 
extracts calculated by Partial Least Squares Discriminant 
Analysis (PLS-DA) 
Variable
VIP
SD
Lower bound 
(95%)
Upper bound 
(95%)
Total PolyS.
1.577
1.205
-1.768
4.922
Total CGA
1.256
1.282
-2.303
4.814
Caffeine
1.119
0.735
-0.920
3.159
Trigonelline
0.724
1.326
-2.958
4.406
Melanoidins
0.376
0.586
-1.252
2.004
PolyS – Polysaccharides; CGA- chlorogenic acids; SD – standard deviation 
Evaluation of probiotic bacteria growth in the presence of 
prebiotic controls and soluble coffee extracts
In the present study, six aqueous extracts from regular 
and decaffeinated roasted C. arabica and C. canephora 
seeds with different chemical compositions were tested in 
vitro, at different concentrations, in the range of a cup of 
coffee, for evaluation of probiotic bacteria growth and 
identification of the main substrates for them. Results from 
incubations in control media are presented in Figures 2 and 
3. MRS medium was used as golden standard, meaning 
ideal for the microorganisms’ growth. This nutrients-rich 
medium has been used in previous studies for the growth 
of Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp.24,50,51  and It 
was expected that it would promote the highest growth of 
these microorganisms as observed (~ 7.23 Log CFU/mL for 
Lactobacillus sp. and ~ 7.22 Log CFU/mL for Bifidobacterium 
sp. after 48h incubation). Although in order to be 
considered probiotic a food must contain 109 CFU/mL,2 
considering losses that have been reported to occur in the 
digestive tract,52,53 the initial probiotics count used in this 
study was about 10³ CFU/mL. In this way, we did not 
overestimate the viable colony counts in the intestine. 
The mMRS broth, with carbon sources restriction 
(exclusion of glucose, beef extract and amonium citrate) 
was used as the poor media control, and was not supposed 
to support the growth of any of the evaluated strains in the 
absence of these substances.50 Unexpectedly, the use of 
mMRS broth resulted in expressive growth, about 6.75 Log 
CFU/mL for Lactobacillus sp. and 6.99 Log CFU/mL for 
Bifidobacterium sp., on average, after 48 hours incubation. 
Similar results were found by Rodríguez-Costa et al.54 and 
Valdés-Varela et al..55 Remaining ingredients from MRS in 
the formulated mMRS, like peptone,56 and especially, yeast 
extract, may justify the probiotics growth, owing to the 
mixture 
of 
amino 
acids, 
peptides, 
vitamins 
and 
carbohydrates in their composition.57,58 The expressive 
growth might also be associated with nutrient reserves in 
cultured microorganisms, given that using the same mMRS 
broth. Mc Laughlin et al.59 found poor growth in different 
strains from the same genera. Nonetheless, the authors 
employed a different method to measure the growth 
(optical density), and only after 24 hours incubation, while 
we evaluated the growth by colony count and up to 48 
hours incubation. In this study, we included only results 
after 48 hours incubation because according to Vanos and 
Bindschedler60, this is when the evaluated strains usually 
reach the stationary phase. 
FOS and inulin were used as prebiotic references, 
considering that they have been widely reported as 
prebiotic compounds.61 Both FOS and inulin were utilized 
by Lactobacillus sp., similar to MRS. Bifidobacteria did not 
perform as well, and utilized FOS better than inulin (Figures 
2 and 3), especially BA. The present results support findings 
from previous studies evaluating the same genera, that 
reported that the prebiotic effect of both inulin and FOS is 
strain-dependent.59, 62-65 Kneifel et al.66 found that inulin 
was a poor substrate for GG, LA and BB12, while these 
microrganisms presented good growth in the presence of 
FOS. Watson et al.50, observed good growth of LA and BB12 
in FOS and good growth of BB12 in inulin substrate. Valdés-
Varela et al.55 evaluated the growth (in vitro) of six 
Bifidobacterium spp. strains, including BB12, and none of 
them utilized inulin for growth, although all of them utilized 
FOS. Vernazza et al.67 tested five Bifidobacterium spp. 
strains, one of them BB12, in different carbohydrates 
sources, including FOS and long-chain inulin, and found no 
growth in long chain inulin and poor growth in FOS. Van der 
Page 8 of 18
Food & Function

Journal Name
ARTICLE
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 7
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
Meulen et al.68 also found poor growth of BA strain in long 
chain inulin. Scott et al.65 evaluated the growth of 
Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacteruim spp. strains and 
found poor growth in the presence of inulin from dahlia 
tubers and higher growth with FOS. McLaughlin et al.59 also 
observed Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. 
growth in the presence of FOS. Inulin and FOS are fructans 
with different degrees of polymerization (DP = 12 for inulin 
from chicory and 25 from dahlia tubers; DP = 2 to 8, for 
FOS, as reviewed by Roberfroid et al.13 The fructan chain 
length is crucial in determining its fermentability, with only 
few bacteria, i.e. L. acidophilus, being able to utilise the 
long-chain fructans used in the present study for growth.65 
Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. can hydrolyze 
FOS 
and 
inulin 
using 
an 
enzyme 
called 
β-
fructofuranosidase, located in the intracellular region of 
these bacteria, but this enzyme is effective mainly for 
catabolism of FOS with low DP (2 to 4).69 Considering this 
study and the aforementioned studies therefore, it is 
possible that the inulin used in the present study (DP = 25) 
had too long chains for Bifidobacteria whose growth 
stimulation effect has been observed when DP was lower 
than 13.20 
Another fact that may explain the low growth of 
Bifidobacteria when incubated with inulin and FOS is 
related to the amounts of these prebiotics administered, 
given that beneficial effects on metabolic activity and 
bifidogenic effects have only been observed in the human 
intestine when at least, 2.5g/day of prebiotic fibers were 
used.13 In Figures 2 and 3, it may be observed that there 
was a tendency of growth increase as the concentration of 
both FOS and inulin increased. This is especially notable in 
the case of Lactobacillus spp., but it has also occurred for 
Bifidobacterium spp. In the present study, the prebiotic 
candidates were used in concentrations commonly 
consumed through coffee. 
 
Figure 2. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of (A) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, (B) Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5, (C) Bifidobacterium animalis Bb12, and (D) 
Bifidobacterium animalis 173010 with positive control medium (MRS broth) and mMRS supplemented with prebiotics (FOS and inulin), in concentrations comparable with coffee 
extracts experiments. Results are presented as Δ Log CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and supplemented mMRS. Different letters over bars indicate significant difference compared to 
MRS bar. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.005; *** p < 0.0005.   FOS – fructooligossacharide; IN – inulin; MRS – De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe broth;.
Page 9 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
8 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
                                 
Figure 3. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of (A) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, (B) Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5, (C) Bifidobacterium animalis Bb12, and (D) 
Bifidobacterium animalis 173010  with control medium (MRS broth) and prebiotics (FOS and inulin), in concentrations comparable  with bioactive compounds experiments. Results 
are presented as Δ Log CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and mMRS supplemented with prebiotics. Diferent letters over bars indicate significant diference compared to MRS bar. * p < 
0.05; ** p < 0.005; *** p < 0.0005.  FOS – fructooligossacharide; IN – inulin; MRS – De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe broth
Regarding coffee extracts, all regular C. arabica and C. 
canephora extracts induced probiotic bacteria growth (Figure 
4), compared to mMRS. Higher growth (similar to MRS and 
higher than FOS and IN) was found when all tested strains 
were incubated with medium roasted coffee extracts, 
especially regular, probably due their higher concentration of 
chlorogenic acids and polysaccharides (Table 1). The highest 
tested concentrations of regular medium roasted extracts 
promoted higher growth than with MRS medium, especially 
for Lactobacillus spp.. For these microorganisms, lower growth 
occurred in dark roasts, probably owing to the loss of 
chlorogenic acids and polysaccharides during roasting, despite 
the presence of melanoidins.18,25,33,33,46,70 This was not as 
noticeable for Bifidobacterium spp. 
In relation to decaffeinated coffee extracts, both C. arabica 
and C. canephora promoted higher probiotics growth than 
MRS, FOS and inulin when all strains were incubated with 1.0 
and 1.5 % soluble coffee. Although the growth with 0.5% was 
lower than in MRS, it was higher than with FOS and inulin. 
Decaffeinated extracts promoted, on average, 20 % lower 
bacterial growth when compared to regular C. arabica 
performances and 4 % when compared to regular C. 
canephora performances (Figure 4). Both decaffeinated 
coffees performed similarly, and this is in accordance with 
their similar composition (Table 1). To the best of our 
knowledge, there are no studies investigating the effect of 
coffee decaffeination on probiotics growth in vitro. Vanos and 
Bindschedler60 observed similar growth of non-probiotic 
Lactobacilli strains when incubated with both regular and 
decaffeinated soluble coffees in vitro. Bifidobacterium spp. 
was not investigated. A few studies have investigated the 
growth of Lactobacillus spp. and Bifibobacterium spp. when 
incubating human fecal material with coffee. Mills et al.25 
incubated human fecal material with FOS and 1.2g of three 
commercial soluble coffees containing 80.8, 33.9 and 33.8 mg 
of chlorogenic acids, and 0.05, 0.1 and 0.1g of fiber, 
respectively. The coffee with highest chlorogenic acid and 
lowest fiber concentration was the only one that induced a 
significant increase in the growth of Bifidobacterium spp., with 
a similar magnitude to that observed with FOS. The authors 
attributed ther higher growth to chlorogenic acids. Limited 
growth of Lactobacillus spp. was observed for all tested 
coffees. 
Jaquet et al.19 observed low Lactobacillus spp. counts and 
increased Bifidobacterium spp. counts in human feces after 
consumption of 3 cups/day of a soluble mixture of roasted and 
green coffee. The growth was attributed to polysaccharides.
More recently, Pérez-Burillo et al.28 evaluated the 
fermentation of green and roasted coffees by human gut 
microbiota, and the community composition was comparable 
between both substrates, with Bifidobacterium spp. (and not 
Lactobacillus spp.) being among the most abundant genera. 
In studies using murine models, Nakayama and Oishi27 found 
in proximal colon higher count of Bifidobaterium spp. and 
Lactobacillus spp. Cowan et al.26 found higher proportion of 
lactobacilli in feces when coffee was associated with high fat 
diet.
Page 10 of 18
Food & Function

Please do not adjust margins
Figure 4. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of (A) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, (B) Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5, (C) Bifidobacterium animalis BB12, and (D) 
Bifidobacterium animalis 173010 with: 1-  Coffea arabica (CA) and 2 -Coffea canephora (CC). Results are presented as ΔLog CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and mMRS supplemented 
with coffee extracts. Diferent letters over the bars indicate significant diference compared to MRS bar.  * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.005; ***p < 0.0005. R -regular; DECAF - Decafeinated;  
M-medium roast; D - dark roast. MRS – De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe broth.
In the present study, we used coffees with different 
chemical compositions, trying to identify the best substrates in 
coffee for the tested probiotics. As aforementioned, the 
amount of polysaccharides, followed by chlorogenic acids and 
caffeine contributed the most to discrimination of coffee 
samples (Table 3). Associating compositional results with the 
bacterial counts after incubations with test substrates, it is 
possible 
to 
observe 
that 
polysaccharides, 
especially 
galactomannan, and chlorogenic acids were determinant for 
the growth of most bacterial strains, except for BB12, which 
presented the best performance in dark roasted C. arabica 
(Figure 4C). 
The use of polysaccharides and polyphenols as substrates 
for bacterial growth has been widely reported. Jaquet et al.19 
attributed 
Bifidobacterium 
spp. 
growth 
to 
coffee 
polysaccharides. Such bacteria possess different glycosyl 
hydrolases located intra- and/or extracellularly that are able to 
cleave the various saccharides in the side chains prior to their 
utilization as a carbon source. They have as well specific 
transporters dedicated to the uptake of intact or hydrolyzed 
substrate intermediates.69,70 In addition to polysaccharides, 
Tian et al.71 suggested that oligosaccharides (DP 8 to 15) 
formed during roasting by the breakdown of polysaccharides 
may also have a role as prebiotic compounds, with arabinose, 
galactose and mannose, being consistently the dominant 
sugars but with diverse structures, depending on the roast 
degree.46 These oligosaccharides have induced better growth 
than inulin and FOS when administered in the same amounts. 
In the present study, considering that these oligosaccharides 
are quite soluble, in our study, they have been probably also 
precipitated during polysaccharides determination. 
In relation to chlorogenic acids, it is known that some 
Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp. have an enzyme 
called 
cinnamoyl-esterase, 
that 
is 
able 
to 
hydrolyse 
chlorogenic acids.24,72-76 These compounds are partly absorbed 
in the small intestine, and so part of the ingested amount  
reaches the gut. The metabolization of chlorogenic acids by 
gut bacteria has been reported with a number of microbial 
metabolites identified.72,77 The first hydrolysis products of 
chlorogenic acid (cafeic and quinic acids) have been reported 
to enhance the growth of Bifidobacterium spp..23,24-78-80
Although both medium roasted regular C. arabica and C. 
canephora extracts contained similarly the highest amounts of 
polysaccharides and chlorogenic acids among all tested coffee 
extracts, C. arabica presented better performance. Two 
components that differentiated these extracts were caffeine, 
with higher concentration in C. canephora, and trigonelline 
(and probably derivatives such as niacin for example), with 
higher concentration in C. arabica.18 
We did not find studies investigating the effect, wether 
inhibitory or stimulating, of caffeine and trigonelline on non-
patogenic 
bacteria, 
but 
a 
number 
of 
studies 
have 
demonstrated antibacterial activity of caffeine on enteric 
bacteria (at 2.0mg/mL)81 and on the foodborne pathogen 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 (at 0.25% to 2.0%, w/v).82,83 
Trigonelline has also been shown to have inhibitory effect 
against enterobacteria strains at 2.0mg/mL81 and high 
antibacterial activity towards the following organisms: 
Page 11 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
10 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
Escherichia coli ATCC 35218, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 
10145, Proteus mirabilis ATCC 7002, Klebsiella pneumoniae 
RSKK 574, Acinetobacter baumannii RSKK 02026, and the 
strains of Gram-positive bacteria Staphyloccocus aureus ATCC 
25923, Enterococcus faecalis ATCC 29212, and Bacillus subtilis 
ATCC 
6633.84 
Futhermore, 
trigonelline 
also 
exerted 
antibacterial activity against cariogenic microrganisms and 
pathogens related to periodontal disease.85,86 On the other 
hand, Kwon et al.87 found that niacin, which is a derivative of 
trigonelline produced during roasting, could enhance L. 
rhamnosus strain growth, being a favorable nitrogen source. 
We have not measured the content of niacin in our extracts, 
but contents have been reported to range between 0.8 and 1.0 
mg/100mL for both C. arabica and C. canephora.16 Therefore, 
after all considerations, it is more probable that lower amount 
of caffeine in C. arabica, have favored higher probiotics 
growth. 
In case of BB12, which presented better growth with the 
dark roasted arabica extract, containing lower concentration 
of chlorogenic acids, it is possible that this bacteria does not 
sintesize cinnamoyl-esterase and therefore cannot metabolize 
chlorogenic acids since Guglielmetti et al75 have not found 
cinnamoyl-esterase activity in BB12 when performing  baterial 
screening. A few studies have attributed probiotics growth in 
coffee containing media to melanoidins, since they are 
indigestible structures of different molecular weights formed 
by aminoacids/peptides, reducing sugars, polysaccharides, 
chlorogenic acids, and other compounds, that grant them 
characteristics of soluble fiber45,88 and substrates to gut 
microbiota.22,89,90 Reichardt et al. (2009)21 investigated ex vivo 
the effect of high molecular weight coffee fractions 
(1.8mg/mL) from different roast degrees (light, medium and 
dark roasts) on human fecal material and did not observe 
differences in the growth of Bifidobacterium genera. In the 
present study, the estimated amount of total melanoidin in 
dark and medium roasted coffees was similar (Table 2), but the 
methodology used for melanoidin estimation was probably not 
sensitive enough to distinguish both roasts.  91-93 But the fact 
that medium roasted coffees had better performance for the 
remaining three strains (Figure 4) suggests that for these 
bacteria melanoidins have a secondary contribution to coffee 
prebiotic effect, compared to other coffee components, or 
that a given melanoidin fraction obtained at medium roast 
degree is more effective than fractions obtained in dark 
coffees to promote the growth of these microorganisms. 
Evaluation of probiotic bacteria growth in the presence of coffee 
main bioactive compounds
In order to corroborate and help explaining the results 
obtained during incubation of probiotic bacteria with coffee 
extracts, selected coffee components were tested individually 
as potential substrates. 
All 
tested 
chlorogenic 
acid 
(5-caffeoylquinic 
acid) 
concentrations stimulated the growth of GG, LA and BA. The 
growth of BB12 was poor, although it seemed to tend to 
improve slightly at higher concentrations (Figure 5). For all 
tested strains, the growth was lower than in MRS, but higher 
or similar to when in media containing FOS or inulin. These are 
in agreement with those obtained with the coffee (Figure 4). 
The results obtained for BA are also in agreement with results 
from previous studies that observed increased non-probiotic 
Bifidobacterium spp. growth in the presence of chlorogenic 
acids.23-25.Mills et al.25 have reported higher Lactobacillus spp. 
and Bifidobacterium spp. growth when incubated with 
chlorogenic acid than with FOS. No specific information on the 
growth of BB12 in chlorogenic acid enriched media was found 
in the literature. 
Figure 5. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of (A) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, (B) Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5, (C) Bifidobacterium animalis BB12, and (D) 
Bifidobacterium animalis 173010 with chlorogenic acid (CGA). MRS – De Man, Rogosa, Sharpe broth; Results are presented as ΔLog CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and mMRS 
supplemented with CGA. Different letters over the bars indicate significant difference compared to MRS bar . * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.005; ***p < 0.0005. MRS – De Man, Rogosa and 
Sharpe broth.
In 
this 
study, 
both 
galactomannan 
and 
type 
2 
arabinogalactan promoted growth of GG, LA and BA, with 
better performance of GG and LA, compared to MRS (Figure 
6). Galactomanan showed better performance for these 
probiotics compared with type 2 arabinogalactan. 
 BB12 (Figure 6C) did not grow when incubated with 
galactomannan and type 2 arabinogalactan, except when 
galactomannan was supplemented at 0.8mg/mL, similar to 
inulin behavior. According to Zartl et al.,94 although BB12 
exibits α-galactosidase activity, this bacteria was not capable 
of using galactomannan to the same extent as of L. rhamnosus 
GG and L. acidophilus LA-5 in their study.
Page 12 of 18
Food & Function

Please do not adjust margins
                  
Figure 6. Results from incubation of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (A), Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5 (B), Bifidobacterium animalis BB12 (C), and Bifidobacterium animalis 173010 
(D) with galactomannan (GM- 1) and type 2 arabinogalactan (AG- 2). Results are presented as Δ Log CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and mMRS supplemented with GM and AG. 
Diferent letters over the bars indicate significant diference when compared to MRS bar.  * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.005; p < 0.0005 *** .  MRS – De Man, Rogosa, Sharpe broth;
Gniechwitz et al.20 evaluated the utilization of both 
coffee polysaccharides (1.5mg/mL) in human fecal bacteria, 
using inulin as positive control. Coffee fibers and inulin did 
not stimulate the growth of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli, 
and an increase in Bacteroides-Prevotella group was 
observed.
In the present study, we observed dose and strain 
dependent growth of probiotics when incubated with 
coffee polysaccharides. A few studies have evaluated the 
growth of diferent types of bacteria with isolated 
galactomannan and type 2 arabinogalactan (also not from 
coffee). Zartl et al.94 tested a hydrolize of galactomannan 
from guar gum as a growth substrate for 20 selected 
probiotic strains (Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium 
spp.) commonly consumed as fermented products in the 
human diet. L. paracasei ssp., L. paracasei DSM 20312, L. 
reuteri, L. plantarum, L. rhamnosus GG, L. acidophilus LA-5, 
E. faecium M74, B. animalis CB120 were able to metabolize 
galactomannans, which was attributed to the presence of 
α-galactosidase in these bacteria. In the study by 
McLaughlin 
et 
al.59, 
galactomannan 
and 
type 
2 
arabinogalactan did not promote growth of Lactobacillus 
spp. isolated from humans, while galactomannan promoted 
Bifidobacterium 
dentium 
NCFB 
2843 
growth, 
and 
arabinogalactan promoted mainly Bifidobacterium longum 
subsp. longum growth. Terpend et al.95 found an increase in 
Bacteroides phyla and Bifidobacterium genera, while in the 
study by Daguet et al.96 arabinogalactan led to an increase 
in Bifidobacterium spp. in distal colon. Robinson et al.97 
found an increase in lactobacilli count and a decrease in 
Bifidobacteria count after 3 and 6 weeks of arabinogalactan 
consumption, respectively. 
 It is important to consider the occurance of bacterial 
diversity in the gastrointestinal tract, and specific 
carbohydrate 
fermentability 
for 
bifidobacteria 
and 
lactobacilli strains, because of the variability in strains from 
the same genera.59 It is also important to note that in 
studies with human fecal samples, the colonic microbiota 
from different donors have degraded coffee fiber 
polysaccharides at different rates but to a similar extent.20
The probiotics counts after incubation with caffeine and 
trigonelline are presented in Figure 7. To our knowledge, 
this is the first study or one of the first studies to evaluate 
the effect of such alkaloids on the count of probiotic 
bacteria. These compounds are absorbed through the 
gastrointestinal tract, especially in the small intestine,98,99 
but we decided to test them because a large number of 
bacteria is lodged in this region100 and also to help 
explaining the results from incubation of probiotics with 
coffee extracts.
Both caffeine and trigonelline limited LA and BA growth 
in a dose dependent manner, slightly limited GG growth 
Page 13 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
12 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
and seemed to have inhibited the growth of BB12, in all 
concentrations. The growth limiting effect of caffeine was 
stronger than trigonelline (Figure 7). Considering all above 
results, the higher concentration of caffeine in medium 
roasted C. canephora extract contributed to its worse 
performance compared to medium roasted C. arabica 
extract. The fact that decaffeinated coffee extracts had 
similar results with all tested strains (Figure 4) support this 
hypothesis.  
Figure 7. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (A), Lactobacillus acidophillus LA-5 (B2), Bifidobacterium animalis Bb12 (C), and Bifidobacterium 
animalis 173010 (D) with caffeine (CAF, 1) and trigonelline (TG, 2) compared to MRS.  Results are presented as ΔLog CFU/mL, comparing mMRS and mMRS supplemented with  
CAF or TG. Different letters over the bars indicate significant difference compared to MRS bar. p ≤ 0.5;* p < 0.005; ** and p < 0.0005 ***. MRS – De  Man, Rogosa, Sharpe broth;
Evaluation of E. coli growth inhibition in the presence of 
coffee extracts and bioactive compounds
Based on the idea that to be considered prebiotic, a 
compound or food must promote selective growth for 
certain microbial groups confering health benefits,12 the 
growth of E. coli bacteria, which commonly colonize human 
gut microbiota and can be elevated in dysbiosis,29 was 
evaluated with the same substrates tested for probiotic 
microrganisms. The results are presented in Figure 8.
As expected, 48 hours incubation of E. coli in a rich broth 
– LB promoted considerable growth (8.41 log CFU/mL). On 
the other hand, none of the tested concentrations of regular 
C. arabica and C. canephora extract supported E. coli growth 
(0.5 % decrease compared to LB). This effect was confirmed 
when the individual compounds were tested. The tested 
bioactive compounds promoted an average decrease of 3 to 
5 % in E.coli growth. This is in agreement with other studies 
which have observed inhibitory effect of coffee and 
bioactive compounds against E. coli and pathogenic 
microorganisms’ growth. 81,85,86,101 In addition to the tested 
compounds, 
α-dicarbonyl 
compounds, 
glyoxal, 
methylglyoxal, and diacetyl have been reported to enhance 
the antimicrobial activity of caffeine102. It has also been 
suggested that H2O2, contained in the brew plays a role in 
coffee antimicrobial activity.103
Conclusions and final considerations
In this study, aqueous extracts of both C. arabica and C. 
canephora species promoted the growth of all tested 
probiotic bacteria (Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG ATCC 53103, 
Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 DSM 13241, Bifidobacterium 
animalis subsp. lactis BB12 DSM 15954 and Bifidobacterium 
animalis CNCM-I2494), but not the growth of E. coli ATCC 
25922. Species and roast degree affected coffee’s effect on 
probiotics growth. Medium roasted C. arabica and C. 
canephora (especially the first) extracts promoted higher 
growth compared to dark roasted extracts,in a dose 
dependent manner, except for BB12, which seemed to 
benefit 
from 
dark 
roasted 
coffee. 
Dichloromethane 
decaffeination slightly decreased the probiotics growth 
stimulating effect of regular coffee, probably because of the 
extraction of bioactive compounds other than caffeine. The 
main compounds responsible for coffees’ prebiotic effect 
were chlorogenic acids and polysaccharides, except for 
BB12, which seemed to have used other components such 
as melanodins as the main substrates. The different 
probiotics behaviors indicated that coffee´s prebiotic effect 
is strain dependent.
Page 14 of 18
Food & Function

Journal Name
ARTICLE
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 13
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
It is noteworthy mentioning that the suggested health 
benefits of the tested probiotic strains are many, and some 
effects are better established than others,104 but studies are 
still needed to investigate the effects of these strains when 
associated with coffee. Also, the authors are aware that 
when testing isolated strains, this study does not take into 
account the diverse bacterial population or the mutual 
metabolic processes that occur in the gastrointestinal 
tract59. However, it provides extensive information on the 
unique 
fermentation 
capabilities 
of 
lactobacilli 
and 
bifidobacteria strains on a range of substrates.
The work with pure cultures is significant in revealing 
differences in growth and it can be used in the development 
of new functional foods focusing on the abilities of a specific 
set of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli to utilize different food 
matrixes and/or bioactive compounds for growth.59 The 
present results suggest the possible use of coffee for 
production of synbiotic formulations. For association of 
different probiotic strains in such products, new studies are 
needed to evaluate their growth behavior when competing 
for substrate.
Figure 8. Bacterial count after 48 hours incubation of Eschericia coli ATCC 25922 with C. arabica (CA – 1), C. canephora (CC – 2), chlorogenic acid (CGA - 3), galactomannan (GM - 4), 
type 2 arabinogalactan (AG - 5), caffeine (CAF - 6) and trigonelline (TG - 7). Results are present as Δ Log CFU/mL, comparing Luria-Bertani (LB) broth with LB supplemented with 
coffee extracts (C. arabica and C. canephora), CGA, GM, AG, CAF or TG. Diferent letters over the bars indicate significant diference compared to control. p ≤ 0.5; * p < 0.005; ** and 
p<0.0005***
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to COCAM Cia de Café Solúvel e 
Derivados - Brazil, for production and donation of soluble coffee 
samples. The authors acknowledge scholarships provided by the 
National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq, Brazil reg.#309091/2016-0), the Rio de Janeiro Research 
Support Foundation (FAPERJ: E-02/2017#234092) and the 
Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel 
- Brazil (CAPES – Finance Code 001).
References
1
N.B. Danneskiold-Samsøe, H.D.F.Q. Barros, R. Santos, J.L. 
Bicas, C.B.B. Cazarin, L. Madsen, K. Kristiansen, G.M. 
Pastore, S. Brix and M.R. Marostica Junior, Interplay 
between food and gut microbiota in health and disease, 
Food Res. Int., 2018, 115, 23
2
C. Hill, F. Guarner, G. Reid, G.R. Gibson, D.J. Merestein, B. 
Pot, L. Morelli, R.B. Canani, H.J. Flint, S. Salminen, P.C. 
Calder and M.E. Sanders. The international scientific 
association for probiotics and prebiotics (IASPP) consensus 
statement on the scope and appropriate use of term 
probiotic, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 2014, 11, 506
3
M. Butel, Probiotics, gut microbiota and health, Med. Mal. 
Infect., 2014, 44, 1
4
J.Z. Goldenberg, C. Yap, L. Lytvyn, C.K. Lo, J. Beardsley, D. 
Mertz and B.C. Johnston, Probiotics for the prevention of 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in adults and 
children, Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2017, 12, doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD006095.pub4.
Page 15 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
14 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
5
L. Drago, Probiotics and colon cancer, Microorganisms, 
2019, 7, 66
6
H.T. Wang, S. Anvari and K. Anagnostou, The role of 
probiotics in preventing allergic disease, Children, 2019, 6, 
24
7
R. Saini, Probiotic nutrition for gastrointestinal health 
modulations in inflammatory bowel disease: a placebo-
controlled clinical study (P20-021-19), 2019, Curr. Dev. 
Nutr., 3, doi: 10.1093/cdn/nzz040.P20-021-19
8
N.M. Delzenne, P.D. Cani, A. Everard, A.M. Neyrinck and 
L.B. Bindels, Gut microorganisms as promising targets for 
the management of type 2 diabetes, Diabetologia, 2015, 
58, 2206
9
R. Wall, J.F. Cryan, R.P. Ross, G.F. Ftzgerald, T.G. Dinan and 
C. Staton, Bacterial neuroactive compounds produced by 
psycobiotics, 
in 
M. 
Lyte, 
J.F. 
Cryan, 
Microbial 
endocrinology: the microbiota gut-brain axis in health and 
disease, Springer, New York, 2014 
10 T.G. Dinan, C. Stanton and J.F. Cryan, Psychobiotics: a 
novel class of psychotropic, Biol Psychiatry., 2013, 74, 720
11 J. Plaza-Diaz, F.J. Ruiz-Ojeda, M. Gil-Campos and A. Gil, 
Mechanisms of action of probiotics, Adv. Nutr. 2019, 10, 
S49
12 G.R. Gibson, R. Hutkins, M.E. Sanders, S.L. Prescott, R.A. 
Reimer, S.J. Salminen, K. Scott, C. Stanton, K.S. Swanson, 
P.D. Cani, K. Verbeke and G. Reid, The international 
scientific association for probiotics and prebiotics (ISAPP) 
consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of 
term prebiotic, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 2017, 
14, 491
13 M. Roberfroid, G.R. Gibson, L. Hoyles, A.L. McCartney, R. 
Rastall, I. Rowland, D. Wolvers, B. Watzl, H. Szajewska, B. 
Stahl, F. Guarner, F. Respondek, K. Whelan, V. Coxam, M.J. 
Davicco, L. Léotoing, Y. Wittrant, N.M. Delzenne, P.D. Cani, 
A.M. Neyrink and A. Meheust, Prebiotic effects: metabolic 
and health benefits, Br. J. Nutr. 2010, S1
14 J.C. Espín, A. González-Sarrías and F.A. Tomás-Barberán, 
The gut microbiota: a key factor in the therapeutic effects 
of (poly)phenols, Biochem Pharmacol., 2017, 139, 82
15 B. Folmer, A. Farah, L. Jones and V. Fogliano, Human 
wellbeing - sociability, performance, and health, In B. 
Folmer, The craft and science of coffee, Academic Press, 
2017
16 A. Farah, Nutritional and health effects of coffee, In P. 
Lashermes, Achieving sustainable cultivation of coffee, 
Burleigh Dodds Science Publishing, United States, 2018
17 P. Esquivel and V.M. Jiménez, Functional properties of 
coffee and coffee by-products, Food Res. Int., 2012, 46, 
488
18 A. Farah, Coffee constitutents, In Y-F Chu Coffee: emerging 
health effects and disease prevention, Wiley-Blackwell, 
2012
19  M. Jaquet, I. Rochat, J. Moulin, C. Cavin and R. Bibiloni, 
Impact of coffee consumption on the gut microbiota: a 
human volunteer study, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2009, 130, 
117
20 D. Gniechwitz, N. Reichardt, M. Blaut, H. Steinhart and M. 
Bunzel, Dietary fiber from coffee beverage: degradation by 
human fecal microbiota, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 55, 
6989
21 N. Reichardt, D. Gniechwitz, H. Steinhart, M. Bunzel and 
M. Blaut, Characterization of high molecular weight coffee 
fractions and their fermentation by human intestinal 
microbiota, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2009, 53, 287
22 A. Jiménez-Zamora, S. Pastoriza and J. A. Rufián-Henares, 
Revalorization 
of 
coffee 
by-products. 
Prebiotic, 
antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, LWT - Food Sci. 
Technol., 2015, 61, 12
23 S. G. Parkar, T. M. Trower and D. E. Stevenson, Fecal 
microbial metabolism of polyphenols and its effects on 
human gut microbiota, Anaerobe, 2013, 23, 12
24 S. Raimondi, A. Anighoro, A. Quartieri, A. Amaretti, F. A. 
Tomás-Barberan, G. Rastelli and M. Rossi, Role of 
bifidobacteria in the hydrolysis of chlorogenic acid, 
MicrobiologyOpen, 2015, 4, 41
25 C. E. Mills, X. Tzounis, M. J. Oruna-Concha, D. S. Mottram, 
G. R. Gibson and J.P.E. Spencer, In vitro colonic 
metabolism of coffee and chlorogenic acid results in 
selective changes in human faecal microbiota growth, Br. 
J. Nutr., 2015, 113, 1220
26 T.E. Cowan, M.S.A. Palmnäs, J. Yang, M. R. Bomhof, K. L. 
Ardell, R. A. Reimer, H. J. Vogel and J. Shearer, Chronic 
coffee consumption in the diet-induced obese rat: impact 
on gut microbiota and serum metabolomics, J. Nutr. 
Biochem., 2014, 25, 489
27 T. Nakayama and K. Oishi, Influence of coffee (Coffea 
arabica) and galacto-oligosaccharide consumption on 
intestinal microbiota and the host responses, FEMS 
Microbiol. Lett., 2013, 343, 161
28 S. Pérez-Burillo, T. Mehta, A. Esteban-Muñoz, S. Pastoriza, 
O. Paliy and J. Á. Rufián-Henares, Effect of in vitro 
digestion-fermentation on green and roasted coffee 
bioactivity: the role of the gut microbiota, Food Chem., 
2019, 279, 252
29 A.W. Walker and T.D. Lawley, Therapeutic Modulation of 
intestinal dysbiosis, Pharmacol. Res., 2013, 69, 75
30 J.C. de Man, M. Rogosa and M.E. Sharpe, A medium for the 
cultivation of lactobacilli, J. Appl. Bact., 1960, 23, 130
31 G. Sezonov, D. Joseleau-Petit and R. D'Ari, Escherichia coli 
physiology in Luria-Bertani Broth, J. Bacteriol., 2007, 189, 
8746
32 A. Farah, T. de Paulis, D.P. Moreira, L.C. Trugo and P.R. 
Martin. Chlorogenic acids and lactones in regular and 
water-decaffeinated arabica coffes, J. Agric. Food Chem., 
2006, 53, 1505
33  A. Farah, M.C. Monteiro, V. Calado, A.S. Franca and L.C. 
Trugo, Correlation between cup quality and chemical 
attributes of Brazilian coffees, Food Chem, 2006, 98, 373
34 G.L. Miller, Use of dinitrosalicilic acid reagent for 
determination of reducing sugar, Anal. Biochem., 1959, 31, 
426
35 E.K. Bekedam, H.A. Schols, M.A.J.S. van Boekel and G. 
Smit, High molecular weight melanoidins from coffee 
brew, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54, 7658
36 D. Granato, P. Putnik, D.B. Kovacevic, J.S. Santos, V. 
Calado, R.S. Rocha, A.G. da Cruz, B. Jarvis, O.Y. Rodionova 
and A. Pomerantsev, Trends in chemometrics: food 
authentication, microbiology, and effects of processing, 
Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2018, 17, 663
37 A. Toci, A. Farah and L.C. Trugo, Efeito do processo de 
descafeinação com diclorometano sobre a composição 
química dos cafés arábica e robusta antes e após a 
torrefação, Química Nova, 2006, 29, 965
38 D. Perrone, A. Farah and C.M. Donangelo, Influence of 
coffee roasting on the incorporantion of phenolic 
compounds into melanoidins and their relationshio with 
antioxidant activity of the brew, J. Agric. Food Chem, 2012, 
60, 4265
39 F. Wei and M. Tanokura, Chemical changes in the 
components of coffee beans during roasting, In. V.R. 
Preedy, Coffee in health and disease prevention, Academic 
Press, 2014
40  L.C. Trugo, R. Macrae and J. Dick, Determination of purine 
alkaloids and trigonelline in instant coffee and other 
beverages using high performance liquid chromatography, 
J. Sci. Food Agric. 1983, 34, 300
Page 16 of 18
Food & Function

Journal Name
ARTICLE
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
J. Name., 2013, 00, 1-3 | 15
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
41 D. Perrone, C.M. Donangelo and A. Farah, Fast 
simultanenous analysis of caffeine, trigonelline, nicotinic 
acid and sucrose in Coffee by liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry, Food Chem. 2008, 110, 1030
42 M. E. Diáz-Rubio and F. Saura-Calixto, Dietary fiber in 
brewed coffee, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 55, 1999
43  J. Simões, P. Madureira, F. M. Nunes, M. R. Domingues, 
M. Vilanova and M. A. Coimbra, Immunostimulatory 
properties of coffee mannans, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2009, 
53, 1036
44 F. M. Nunes and M. A. Coimbra, Chemical characterization 
of the high molecular weight material extracted with hot 
water from green and roasted arabica coffee, J. Agric. 
Food Chem., 2001, 49, 1773
45 F. M. Nunes and M. A. Coimbra, Melanoidins from coffee 
infusions. Fractionation, chemical characterization, and 
effect of the degree of roast, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 
55, 3967
46 F. M. Nunes and M. A. Coimbra, Chemical characterization 
of the high molecular weight material extracted with hot 
water from green and roasted robusta coffee as affected 
by the degree of roast, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50, 
7046
47 R.J. Redgwell, V. Trovato, D. Curti and M. Fischer, Effect of 
roasting on degradation and structural features of 
polysaccharides in Arabica coffee beans, Carbohydr. Res., 
2002, 337, 421
48 A.S.P. Moreira, F.M. Nunes, M.R. Domingues and M.A. 
Coimbra, Coffee melanoidins: structures, mechanisms of 
formation and potential health impacts, Food Funct., 2012, 
3, 903
49 A.S.P. Moreira, J. Simões, C.P. Passos. F.M. Nunes, M.R.M. 
Domingues and M.A. Coimbra, Melanoidins, In A. Farah, 
Coffee: production, quality and chemistry, Royal Society of 
Chemistry, Cambridge, 2019
50 D. Watson, M.O.C Motherway, M.H.C. Schoterman, R.J. 
Joost van Neerven, A. Nauta and D. van Sinderen, Selective 
carbohydrate utilization by lactobacilli and bifidobacteria, 
J. Appl. Microbiol., 2013, 114, 1132
51 I.M. Sims, J.L.J Ryan and S.H. Kim, In vitro fermentation of 
prebiotic olgiosaccharides by Bifidobacterium lactis HN019 
and Lactobacillus spp., Anaerobe, 2014, 25, 11
52 A. Lo Curto, I. Pitino, G. Mandalari, J.R. Dainty, R.M. Faulks 
and M.S.J. Wickham, Survival of probiotic lactobacilli in the 
upper gastrointestinal tract using an in vitro gastric model 
of digestion, Food Microbiol., 2011, 28, 1359
53 R. Caillard and N. Lapointe, In vitro gastric survival of 
commercially available probiotic strains and oral dosage 
forms, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 519, 125
54 S. Rodríguez-Costa, A. Cardelle-Cobas, P. Roca-Saavedra, J. 
J. Porto-Arias, J. M. Miranda and A. Cepeda, In vitro 
evaluation of the prebiotic effect of red and white grape 
polyphenolic extracts, J. Physiol. Biochem., 2017, 74, 101
55 L. Valdés-Varela, P. Ruas-Madiedo and M. Gueimonde, In 
vitro fermentation of different fructo-oligosaccharides by 
Bifidobacterium strains for the selection of synbiotic 
combinations, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2017, 242, 19
56 V.L. Gray  C.T. Müller  I.D. Watkins and  D. Lloyd, Peptones 
from diverse sources: pivotal determinants of bacterial 
growth dynamics, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2008, 104, 554
57 S.A. Hayek, A. Shahbazi, S.S. Awaisheh, N.P. Shah and S.A. 
Ibrahim, Sweet potatoes as a basic component in 
development a medium for the cultivation of lactobacilli, 
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 2013, 77, 2248
58 J.L. Sørensen and T.E. Sondergaard, The effects of different 
yeast extracts on secondary metabolite production in 
Fusarium, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2014, 170, 55
59 H. 
P. 
McLaughlin, 
M. 
O. 
'C. 
Motherway, 
B. 
Lakshminarayanan, C. Stanton, R. P. Ross, J. Brulc, R. 
Menon, P. W. O'Toole and D. van Sinderen, Carbohydrate 
catabolic diversity of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli of 
human origin, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2015, 203, 109
60 V. Vanos and 0. Bindschedler, The microbiology of instant 
coffee, Food Microbiol., 1985, 2, 187
61 L. B. Bindels, N. M. Delzenne, P. D. Cani and J. Walter, 
Towards a more comprehensive concept for prebiotics, 
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., 2015, 12, 303
62 M. Rossi, C. Corradini, A. Amaretti, M. Nicolini, A. Pompei, 
S. 
Zanoni 
and 
D. 
Matteuzzi, 
Fermentation 
of 
fructooligosaccharides and inulin by Bifidobacteria: a 
comparative study of pure and fecal cultures, Appl. 
Environ. Microbiology, 2015, 71, 6150
63 T. Van de Wiele, N. Boon, S. Possemiers, H. Jacobs and W. 
Verstraete, Inulin-type fructans of longer degree of 
polymerization exert more pronounced in vitro prebiotic 
effects, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2007, 102, 452
64 G. Falony, K. Lazidou, A. Verschaeren, S. Weckx, D. Maes 
and L. De Vuyst, In vitro kinetic analysis of fermentation of 
prebiotic inulin-type fructans by Bifidobacterium species 
reveals 
four 
different 
phenotypes, 
Appl. 
Environ. 
Microbiology, 2009, 75, 454
65 K. P. Scott, J. C. Martin, S. H. Duncan and H. J. Flint, 
Prebiotic stimulation of human colonic butyrate-producing 
bacteria and bifidobacteria, in vitro, FEMS Microbiol Ecol, 
2014, 87, 30
66 W. Kneifel, A. Rajal and K.D. Kulbe, In vitro growth 
behaviour of probiotic bacteria in culture media with 
carbohydrates of prebiotic importance, Microb. Ecol. 
Health Dis., 2000, 12, 27
67 C.L. Vernazza, G.R. Gibson and R.A. Rastall, Carbohydrate 
preference, acid tolerance and bile tolerance in five strains 
of Bifidobacterium, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2006, 100, 846
68 R. Van der Meulen, L. Avonts, and L. De Vuyst, Short 
fractions of oligofructose are preferentially metabolized by 
Bifidobacterium animalis DN-173 010, Appl. Environ. 
Microbiology, 2004, 70, 1923
69 Y.J. Goh and T.R. Klaenhammer, Genetic mechanisms of 
prebiotic 
oligosaccharide 
metabolism 
in 
probiotic 
microbes, Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 6, 137
70 A. Farah, T. de Paulis, L.C. Trugo and P.R. Martin, Effect of 
roasting on the formation of chlorogenic acid lactones in 
coffee, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53, 1505
71 T. Tian, S. Freeman, M. Corey, J. B. German and D. Barile, 
Chemical 
Characterization 
of 
potentially 
prebiotic 
oligosaccharides in brewed coffee and spent coffee 
grounds, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2017, 65, 2784
72 F. Tomás-Barberan, R. García-Villalba, A. Quartieri, S. 
Raimondi, A. Amaretti, A. Leonardi and M. Rossi, In vitro 
transformation of chlorogenic acid by human gut 
microbiota, Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 2014, 58, 1122
73 D. Couteau, A.L. McCartney, G.R. Gibson, G. Williamson 
and C.B. Faulds, Isolation and characterization of human 
colonic bacteria able to hydrolyse chlorogenic acid, J. Appl. 
Microbiol., 2001, 90, 873
74 C. Fritsch, A. Jansch, M.A. Ehrmann, S. Toelstede, and R.F. 
Vogel, Characterization of cinnamoyl esterases from 
different lactobacilli and bifidobacteria. Curr. Microbiol., 
2017, 74, 247
75 S. Guglielmetti, I. de Noni, F. Caracciolo, F. Molinari, C. 
Parini and D. Mora, Bacterial cinnamoyl esterase activity 
screening for the production of a novel functional food 
product, Appl. Environ. Microbiol, 2008, 74, 1284
76 E.A.A. Santos, A. Schieber and F. Weber, Site-specific 
hydrolysis of chlorogenic acids by selected Lactobacillus 
species, Food Res. Int., 2018, 109, 426
Page 17 of 18
Food & Function

ARTICLE
Journal Name
16 | J. Name., 2012, 00, 1-3
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx
Please do not adjust margins
Please do not adjust margins
77 A. Farah, M. Monteiro, C.M. Donangelo and S. Lafay, 
Chlorogenic acids from green coffee extract are highly 
bioavaliable in humans, J. Nutr., 2008, 138, 2309
78 M.P. Gonthier, C. Remesy, A. Scalbert, V. Cheynier, J. M. 
Souquet, K. Poutanen and A. M. Aura, Microbial 
metabolism of caffeic acid and its esters chlorogenic and 
caftaric acids by human faecal microbiota in vitro, Biomed. 
Pharmacother., 2006, 60, 536
79 A. S. Rechner, M. A. Smith, G. Kuhnle, G. R. Gibson, E. S. 
Debnam, K.S. Srai, K. P. Moore and C. A. Rice-Evans, 
Colonic metabolism of dietary polyphenols: influence of 
structure on microbial fermentation products, Free Radical 
Biol. Med., 2004, 36, 212
80 M. N. Pinta, I. Montoliu, A-M. Aura, T. Seppänen-Laakso, 
D. Barron and S. Moco, In vitro gut metabolism of [U-13C]-
quinic acid, the other hydrolysis product of chlorogenic 
acid, 
Mol. 
Nutr. 
Food 
Res., 
2018, 
62, 
doi: 
10.1002/mnfr.201800396
81 A.A.P. Almeida, A. Farah, A., D.A.M. Silva, E.A. Nunam, B.A. 
Glória, Antibacterial activity of coffee extracts and selected 
coffee chemical compounds against Enterobacteria, J. 
Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54, 8738
82 S.A. Ibrahim, M.M. Salameh, S. Phetsomphou, H. Yang, 
C.W. Seo, Application of caffeine, 1,3,7-trimethylxanthine, 
to control Escherichia coli O157:H7, Food Chem., 2006, 99, 
645
83 M.B.A. 
Glória, 
A.A.P. 
Almeida 
and 
N. 
Engeseth, 
Antimicrobial activity of coffee, In A. Farah, Coffee: 
consumption and health implications, 2019, Royal Society 
of Chemistry, Cambridge
84 B. Özçelik, M. Kartal and I. Orhan, Cytotoxicity, antiviral 
and antimicrobial activities of alkaloids, flavonoids, and 
phenolic acids, Pharm. Biol., 2011, 49, 396
85 A.G. Antonio, R.S. Moraes, D. Perrone, L.C. Maia. K.R.N. 
Santos, N.L.P. Iório and A. Farah, Species, roast degree and 
decaffeination influence the antibacterial activity of coffee 
against Streptococcus mutans, Food Chem, 2010, 118, 782
86 F.M da Silva, N.L.P. Iorio, L.A. Lobo, K.R.N dos Santos, A. 
Farah, L. Maia and A.G. Antonio, Antibacterial effect of 
aqueous extracts and bioactive chemical compounds of 
Coffea canephora against microorganisms involved in 
dental caries and periodontal disease, Adv. Microbiol., 
2014, 4, 978
87 S. Kwon, P.C. Lee, E.G. Lee, Y.K. Chang and N. Chang, 
Production of lactic acid by Lactobacillus rhamnosus with 
vitamin-supplemented 
soybean 
hydrolysate, 
Enzyme 
Microb. Technol., 2000, 26, 209
88 J.M.S. Silván, F. J. Morales and F. Saura-Calixto, Conceptual 
study on maillardized dietary fiber in coffee J. Agric. Food 
Chem., 2010, 58, 12244
89 V. Fogliano and F. J. Morales, Estimation of dietary intake 
of melanoidins from coffee and bread, Food Funct., 2011, 
2, 117
90 C. Coelho, M. Ribeiro, A.C.S. Cruz, M.R.M. Domingues, 
M.A. Coimbra, M. Bunzel and F.M. Nunes, Nature of 
phenolic compounds in coffee melanoidins, J. Agric. Food 
Chem., 2014, 62, 7843
91 R.C. Borrelli, A. Visconti, C. Mennella, M. Anese and V. 
Fogliano, Chemical characterization and antioxidant 
properties of coffee melanoidins, J. Agric. Food. Chem., 
2002, 50, 6527
92 M.F. Kurniawan, N. Andarwulan, N. Wulandari and M. Rafi, 
Metabolomic 
approach 
for 
understanding 
phenolic 
compounds and melanoidin roles on antioxidant activity of 
Indonesia robusta and arabica coffee extracts, Food Sci 
Biotechnol, 2017, 26, 1475
93 J.A. Vignoli, M.C. Viegas, D.G. Bassoli and M.T. Benassi, 
Roasting 
process 
affects 
differently 
the 
bioactive 
compounds and the antioxidant activity of arabica and 
robusta coffees, Food Res. Int., 2014, 61, 279
94 B. Zartl, K. Silberbauer, R. Loeppert, H. Viernstein, W. 
Praznik and M. Mueller, Fermentation of non-digestible 
raffinose family oligosaccharides and galactomannans by 
probiotics, Food Funct., 2018, 9, 1638
95 K. Terpend, S. Possemiers, D. Daguet and M. Marzorati, 
Arabinogalactan and fructo-oligosaccharides have a 
different fermentation profile in the Simulator of the 
Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem (SHIME®), Environ. 
Microbiol. Rep., 2013, 5, 595
96 D. Daguet, I. Pinheiro, A. Verhelst, S. Possemiers and M. 
Marzorati, Arabinogalactan and fructooligosaccharides 
improve the gut barrier function in distinct areas of the 
colon in the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial 
Ecosystem, J. Funct. Foods, 2016, 20, 369
97 R. R. Robinson, J. Feirtag and J.L. Slavin, Effects of dietary 
arabinogalactan on gastrointestinal and blood parameters 
in health human subjects, J. Am. Coll. Nutr., 2001, 20, 279
98 S. Yuyama, Absorption of trigonelline from the small 
intestine of the specific pathogen-free (SPF) and germ-free 
(GF) rats in vivo, Adv Exp Med Biol., 1999, 467, 723
99 F. Burdan, Pharmacology of caffeine: the main active 
compound of coffee, In V.R. Preedy, Coffee in health and 
disease prevention, Academic Press, 2014
100
G.P. Donaldson, S.M. Lee and S.K. Mazmanian, Gut 
biogeography of the bacterial microbiota, Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol., 2016, 14, 20
101
J.A. Rufián-Henares and F.J. Morales, Antimicrobial 
activity of melanodins against Escherichia coli is mediated 
by a membrane-damage mechanism, J. Agric. Food Chem., 
2008, 56, 2357
102
M. Daglia, A. Papetti, P. Grisoli, C. Aceti, V. Sapini, C. 
Dacarro and G. Gazzani, Isolation. identification, and 
quantification of roasted coffee antibacterial compounds, 
J. Agric. Food. Chem., 2007, 55, 10208
103
U. Mueller, T. Sauer, I. Weigel, R. Pichner and M. 
Pischetsrieder, Identification of H2O2 as a major 
antimicrobial component in coffee, Food Funct., 2011, 2, 
265
104
P. 
Petrova 
and 
K. 
Petrov, 
Prebiotic-probiotic 
relationship: the genetic fundamentals of polysaccharides 
conversion by Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus genera, In 
A.M. Grumezescu and A.M. Holban, Food Bioconversion, 
Academy Press
Page 18 of 18
Food & Function
