Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20 (2010) S187–S204
S187
DOI 10.3233/JAD-2010-091387
IOS Press
Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis
Catarina Santosa,b,∗, Jo˜ao Costac,d, Jo˜ao Santosc, Ant´onio Vaz-Carneiroc and Nuno Luneta,b
aDepartment of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Porto University Medical School, Porto, Portugal
bInstitute of Public Health of the University of Porto (ISPUP), Porto, Portugal
cCenter for Evidence-Based Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Portugal
dCentro de Investigaci´on Biom´edica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain
Abstract. A recent meta-analysis of 4 studies published up to January 2004 suggests a negative association between coffee
consumption and Alzheimer’s disease, despite important heterogeneity in methods and results. Several epidemiological studies
on this issue have been published since then, warranting an update of the insights on this topic. We conducted a systematic review
and meta-analysis of published studies quantifying the relation between caffeine intake and cognitive decline or dementia. Data
sources searched included Medline, LILACS, Scopus, Web of Science and reference lists, up to September 2009. Cohort and
case-control studies were included. Three independent reviewers selected the studies and extracted the data on to standardized
forms. Nine cohort and two case-control studies were included. Quantitative data synthesis of the most precise estimates from
each study was accomplished through random effects meta-analysis. Heterogeneity was quantiﬁed using the I2 statistic. The
outcomes of the studies considered for meta-analysis were Alzheimer’s disease in four studies, dementia or cognitive impairment
in two studies, and cognitive decline in three studies. The summary relative risk (RR) for the association between caffeine intake
and different measures of cognitive impairment/decline was 0.84 [95% Conﬁdence Interval (95% CI): 0.72–0.99; I2 = 42.6%].
When considering only the cohort studies, the summary RR was 0.93 (95% CI: 0.83–1.04, I2 = 0.0%), and 0.77 (95% CI:
0.63–0.95, I2 = 34.7%), if the most inﬂuential study was excluded. This systematic review and meta-analysis found a trend
towards a protective effect of caffeine, but the large methodological heterogeneity across a still limited number of epidemiological
studies precludes robust and deﬁnite statements on this topic.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, caffeine, dementia, meta-analysis
INTRODUCTION
Dementia is a syndrome caused by a range of ill-
nesses, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (the most
prevalent form), vascular, frontotemporal lobe, Lewy
body, and other types of dementia [1]. The age-
standardized Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs)
for dementia in 2004 was 260/100,000 in the USA and
350/100,000 in Europe [2]. According to the World
∗Correspondence to:
Catarina Santos, Servic¸o de Higiene e
Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto,
Alameda Professor Hernˆani Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal.
Tel.: +351 225513652; Fax: +351 225 513 653; E-mail: catarina-
santos@portugalmail.pt.
Health Organization [2], AD and other dementias are
the fourth most important cause of DALYs in high-
income countries, corresponding to 3.6% of the total
DALYs, a number that is expected to grow up to 5.6%
in 2030 [3].
The growing burden of AD and other
types of dementia have highlighted the importance of
research in this ﬁeld [4], and in recent years there has
been a virtual explosion of information concerning the
epidemiology, diagnosis, neuropathology, and patho-
physiology of dementing disorders.
At present, the efﬁcacy of the pharmacological treat-
ments available is limited and thus, one of the aims of
clinical research should be the identiﬁcation of modi-
ﬁable risk factors [5] and their interaction with genetic
susceptibility markers [6]. Lower education is a recog-
ISSN 1387-2877/10/$27.50 2010 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

S188
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
nized risk factor for dementia [7], and it has been sug-
gested that diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance, high
cholesterol, hypertension, reduced exercise, and obesi-
ty are also associated with AD [1]. Smoking may also
be a risk factor for dementia and AD [8], especially
among the APOE ε4 carriers [6]. The potential effect
of diet on the prevention of dementia [9] and cognitive
decline further extends this research ﬁeld, and caffeine
intake has been receiving growing attention.
Caffeine is a widely available and consumed sub-
stance [10], and it displays afﬁnities for several kinds
of receptors present in the synaptic membranes, and
also for cytoplasmic phosphodiesterases, enabling the
modiﬁcation of synaptic mechanisms [10]. It acts as a
nonselective antagonist of adenosine receptors, and the
blockade of A2A receptors has recently been demon-
strated to limit the synaptotoxic effect of Aβ [11]. Ex-
perimental studies in animal models have also shown
that adenosine A2A and glutamate mGlu5R receptors
are co-located, and that the former play a permissive
role in mGlu5R receptor-mediated potentiation of N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) effects in the hippocam-
pus [12].
Several epidemiological studies have shown a nega-
tive association between coffee drinking and idiopath-
ic Parkinson’s disease, another important neurodegen-
erative condition, particularly in men [13]. The plau-
sible biological mechanisms evoked suggest that caf-
feine may attenuate the loss of striatal dopamine and
dopamine transporter binding sites [14].
A recent meta-analysis [15] of 4 studies published
up to January 2004 suggests a negative association be-
tween coffee consumption and Alzheimer’s disease,de-
spite important heterogeneity in methods and results.
Several epidemiological studies on this issue have been
published since then, warranting an update of the in-
sights on this topic.
We aimed to review systematically and summarize
the published studies, addressing the effect of caf-
feine in cognitive decline and dementia, and to dis-
cuss the methodological heterogeneity of the available
evidence.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Search strategy
Potential eligible studies were identiﬁed though an
electronic search of the databases Medline, LILACS
(Latin America and Caribbean), Scopus, and Web of
Science, and by extensive searching using cross ref-
erences from original articles and reviews. Electronic
databases were searched from inception to September
2009. The search used the following terms to identify
the risk exposure (coffee OR caffeine) combined with
terms to identify the outcomes of interest: dementia
OR Alzheimer OR [(Alzheimer* OR vascul* OR cere-
brovascular OR cereb*) AND (dement* OR deterio-
rat* OR insufﬁcien*)] OR [(cognit* OR memory* OR
mental*) AND (declin* OR impair* OR los* OR de-
teriorat*)]. When applicable, we searched all terms as
indexed and as free text terms to increase sensitivity. A
search ﬁlter was developed (Cohort Studies OR Case
Control Studies OR Prospective Studies OR Follow-Up
Studies OR Cross-Sectional Studies OR Retrospective
studies OR Epidemiological OR Incidence OR Risk
Factors OR Risk Assessment OR Risk Reduction OR
Relative Risk OR Behavior Regression Analysis OR
Multivariate Analysis OR Proportional Hazards Mod-
els) and applied to the search results in order to retrieve
epidemiological studies. There were no language re-
strictions on searching. We screened titles, keywords,
and abstracts of the citations downloadedfrom the elec-
tronic searches and obtained full copies of potentially
suitable reports for further assessment. We considered
studies published as a full paper or abstract as long as
relevant data could be extracted.
Selection criteria
We included studies with a cohort, case-control and
cross-sectional design that addressed the relation be-
tween caffeine consumption, through coffee and/or tea
intake regardless of assessment of other dietary sources
of caffeine, and different forms of dementia, cognitive
impairment, or cognitive decline (all diagnostic criteria
were considered).
Cross-sectional studies or analyses relying on retro-
spective assessment of exposure were excluded when
cognitively impaired subjects were the informants for
estimation of their own caffeine intake.
No studies
were excluded a priori for weakness of design or data
quality. However, to be included in the meta-analysis,
studies had to provide or allow the calculation of the
relative risk (RR), or the odds ratio (OR) in case-control
studies, and the respective variance estimates.
An additional cohort study being published in the
current issue of the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease was
also considered in this review [16].

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S189
137 publications identified from electronic 
databases search
11 articles included in the systematic review 
132 excluded (non-relevant): 
5 review articles 
127 non-epidemiological studies
6 articles identified
through reference lists 
search 
5 articles 
Fig. 1. Systematic review ﬂow-chart.
Data extraction
The selected articles were reviewed independently
by three researchers (JC, JS and CS) and data were
extracted using a predeﬁned form. Discrepancies in the
evaluation of the articles were resolved by consensus,
involving a fourth researcher (NL).
From each study we collected information on: year
of publication; country of origin, and population eval-
uated (general description, number, age, and gen-
der of the participants); type of study (cohort, nest-
ed case-control, case-cohort, population- or hospital-
based case-control); exposureassessment (instruments,
period of exposure, and informants); outcomes and cri-
teria for outcome deﬁnition; control for confounding;
data on the relation between caffeine exposure and the
outcomes. From cohort studies we also extracted in-
formation regarding the length and completeness of
follow-up.
In the report by Broe and colleagues [17], one of the
comparisons presented had lifelong consumers as the
reference category,and we computed the OR using non-
consumers as the reference class, as the distribution of
matched pairs across exposure categories was provided.
When a study provided results with different degrees
of adjustment for confounders, the estimates adjusted
for the largest number of possible confounding vari-
ables were selected. Sex-speciﬁc results were extracted
whenever available.
The authors from the studies included in the present
systematic review were not contacted to retrieve addi-
tional data.
Data synthesis and meta-analysis
Each study is summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 2.
The results from studies not providing RR estimates
are described in the text. Data synthesis is further ac-
complished through meta-analysis (Fig. 3) and visual
inspection of scatter plots representing the log Rela-
tive Risk (RR) estimates from each study according to
the distribution of methodological characteristics with
potential impact on the heterogeneityof results (Fig. 5).
Studies were grouped by the outcome addressed.
Dementia and Alzheimer’s disease were deﬁned ac-
cording to the existing clinical criteria (DSM-IV and/or
NINCDS-ADRDA). Cognitive decline was considered
when studies quantiﬁed the difference in score per-
formance using neuropsychological instruments in two
distinct occasions, regardless of the cutoff values. An
abnormal score in at least one of the tests, at any time,
was deﬁned as cognitive impairment.
The forest plot corresponding to Figure 2 represents
the RR estimates provided in each study for the as-
sociation between caffeine intake and dementia. Sev-

S190
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Table 1
Main characteristics of the studies included in the systematic review

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S191
Table 1, continued

S192
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Table 1, continued

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S193
Table 1, continued

S194
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Table 1, continued

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S195
Table 1, continued
MSQ – Mental Status Questionnaire; NS – Not speciﬁed; GP – General Practitioner; SD – Standard Deviation; NINCDS-ADRDA – National Institute of Neurological and Communicative
Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association Criteria for Alzheimer’s Disease; 3MS – Modiﬁed Mini Mental Status Examination * – computed by
the authors of this systematic review using the information provided in the original report; DSM -IV – Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition; FFQ – Food
Frequency Questionnaire; MMSE – Mini Mental State Examination; Benton – Benton Visual Retention Test; Isaacs – Isaacs Set Test;
one unit = 100 mg of caffeine; TELE – Telephone
assessment for dementia; TICS – Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status.

S196
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Fig. 2. Relative Risk estimates for the association between caffeine and different forms of dementia/cognitive decline, according to sources of
caffeine intake and levels of exposure. *regular consumption stands for “nearly every day”; † daily consumption a – TELE < 16; b – TICS <
22.5; c – 16 ⩽TELE ⩽17.5; d – 22.5 ⩽TICS ⩽26.5; e – MMSE; f – ∆MMSE ⩽−2; g – ∆Benton ⩽−2; h – ∆Isaacs ⩽−6; i – ∆
MMSE ⩽−1; M – Male; F – Female; C – coffee; T – tea; C+T – coffee and tea; CB – caffeinated beverages; CB+Choc. – caffeinated beverages
and chocolate.
eral estimates from the same study may be provided,
referring to different exposures (e.g., coffee consump-
tion or caffeine intake estimated through a food fre-
quency questionnaire) and levels of exposure, different
outcomes (e.g., dementia and cognitive impairment),
and different criteria for deﬁnition of the same out-
come (e.g., variation in Mini Mental State Examination
(MMSE) or in Benton Visual Retention Test scores to
deﬁne cognitive decline).
Quantitative data synthesis was accomplished thro-
ugh random effects meta-analysis (DerSimonian and
Laird method), conducted with STATA , version 9.2.
Relative Risks (cumulative incidence ratios or inci-
dence density ratios), and ORs were treated the same
and are referred to as RR [18]. Summary estimates
for exposure to caffeine were computed considering
the individual RR estimates corresponding to coffee,
coffee and tea, or overall caffeine intake, as available
from each article, under the assumption that coffee is
the main contributor for caffeine intake [19,20].

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S197
Fig. 3. Meta-analysis for the association between caffeine and different forms of dementia/cognitive decline, including the most precise RR
estimates from each individual study. ID – Identiﬁcation; RR – Relative Risk; M – Male; F – Female.
SincemorethanoneRRestimatewereavailablefrom
several studies and the small number of independent
investigations precluded meaningful subgroup or trend
estimation analyses, only the most precise measures of
association were used from each report (except for sex-
speciﬁc estimates, which were considered separately
as if obtained from different studies). These criteria
were applied to the selection of a single estimate per
study when RR estimates were provided for different
categories of exposure. The reports by Eskelinen et
al. [21], Laitala et al. [20], and Santos et al. [16] pro-
vided RR estimates for different outcomes, and only
the results for the outcome with the most precise esti-
mates were considered. Laitala et al. [20] deﬁned the
same outcome using different criteria, and only the cri-
terion with the most precise estimates was considered.
Ritchie et al. [22] addressed the effect of caffeine on
cognitive decline, relying on three different methods
for assessment of cognitive performance, and the esti-
mates corresponding to variation in the MMSE score
were selected to allow a more meaningful comparison
with the other studies assessing the risk of cognitive
decline [16,19].
Heterogeneity was quantiﬁed using the I 2 statis-
tic [23]. Sensitivity analyses were conductedexcluding
highly inﬂuential studies or those not providing RR es-
timates adjusted for potentially important confounding
factors in addition to age and sex. The report by Tyas et
al. [24] refers to a subsample of the study published by
Lindsay et al. [25], and was also excluded in sensitivity
analysis.
Publication and publication-related biases were ex-
amined through visual inspection of the funnel plot
(Fig. 4). The Begg adjusted rank correlation test [26],
and the Egger’s regression asymmetry test [27] were
used for further assessment of these biases through hy-
pothesis testing.
Figure 5 includes scatter plots aiming to further ex-
plore the reasons for heterogeneityof results within and
across cohort studies. Only results from studies pro-

S198
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Maia, 2002
Santos, 2009 (F)
Broe, 1990
Lindsay, 2002
Laitala, 2009
Eskelinen, 2009
Santos, 2009 (M)
Ritchie, 2007 (F)
Ritchie, 2007 (M)
Tyas , 2001
Ng, 2008 (F)
Ng, 2008 (M)
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
Standard error of log Relative Risk
.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Relative Risk (log scale)
Funnel plot with pseudo 95% confidence limits
Fig. 4. Meta-analysis funnel plot. M – Male; F – Female.
viding RR estimates for at least two categories of expo-
sure compared with the referent were plotted. In each
study, when more than one criterion was used to deﬁne
the same outcome, only the results corresponding to
the criterion yielding the more precise estimates were
selected. All the RR estimates corresponding to each
outcome addressed in the eligible studies were repre-
sented. In Fig. 5a the log RR is represented across lev-
els of caffeine intake. The exposuresconsidered for RR
estimates were assumed to correspond to the midpoint
of the index category range subtracted by the midpoint
of the reference category range. For this purpose, we
assumed that the open-ended upper category had the
amplitude of the preceding stratum.
Figure 5 (b to d) addresses the potential for selection
and information bias in each study, using the partici-
pants’ age at baseline, the duration of follow-up and
its completeness as surrogate markers for the latter ef-
fects. The pattern of association between these method-
ological characteristics and the RR estimates from each
study may contribute to understand the heterogeneity
between studies.
RESULTS
Eleven studies fulﬁlled the inclusion criteria for sys-
tematic review [16,17,19–22,24,25,28–30]. The main
characteristics of the studies and results on the relation
between caffeine intake and cognitive impairment are
summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 2.
The publication year ranged from 1989 to 2009. The
studies were conducted in Europe (three in Finland [20,
29,30], two in Portugal [16,28], one in France [22],
one multicentric study conducted in Italian, Finish and
Dutch populations [21]); one in Australia [17]; two in
Canada [24,25]; and one in China [19]. Two were case-
control [17,28], and nine were cohort studies [16,19–
22,24,25,29,30]. The age of the youngest participant
at the time of baseline evaluation ranged from 37 to 68
years. The results were stratiﬁed accordingto gender in
three of the studies [16,19,22], and one was conducted
on a male cohort [30].
Different sources of caffeine were accounted for in
the reports reviewed. Most studies evaluated coffee
and tea intake, assessing their effects separately [17,19,
24,25], or considering the consumption of both bever-
ages [22]. Two studies extended exposure assessment
to all caffeinated beverages [16,28] and products con-
taining chocolate [16]. Van Gelder et al. and Laitala
et al. evaluated only coffee consumption [20,30]. Dif-
ferent categories of exposure were considered, rang-
ing from less than one to 8 units, equivalent to cof-
fee cups/day. Also, the reference categories includ-
ed different proportions of non-caffeine consumers and
consumers of different amounts of caffeine (Table 1).
In one study,the outcome was measured as a continu-
ous variable according to the scores obtained in several
neuropsychological tests, and a correlation coefﬁcient
was the only measure of association reported [29]. Van
Gelder and colleagues presented results on the decline
in cognitive performance(variation in MMSE scores as
a quantitative variable) according to coffee intake [30].

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S199
-3
-2
-1
0
1
ln Relative Risk
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cups/units of coffee/tea consumed per day (exposed - reference category)
AD
D
CI
CD
b
a
c
-3
-2
-1
0
1
ln Relative Risk
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Lower age limit at baseline* (years)
AD
D
CI
CD
-3
-2
-1
0
1
ln Relative Risk
55
65
75
85
Completeness of follow-up (%)
AD
D
CI
CD
d
-3
-2
-1
0
1
ln Relative Risk
1
3
5
10
20
30
mean/median follow-up period (years)
AD
D
CI
CD
Fig. 5. Relation between caffeine intake, participants’ age at baseline, completeness and duration of follow-up and log Relative Risk estimates
for the relation between caffeine intake (including only the studies presenting RR estimates for more than one category of exposure) and different
measures of cognitive performance*. AD – Alzheimer’s disease; D – Dementia; CI – Cognitive impairment; CD – Cognitive decline * the areas
of the symbols are proportional to the precision of the estimates, reﬂecting their relative weight when summary estimates are computed.
RR estimates were computed in nine studies [16,17,
19–22,24,25,28] (Fig. 2). Five had Alzheimer’s dis-
ease as the outcome [17,21,24,25,28], deﬁned by the
NINCDS/ADRDA criteria.
Of these, only one [21]
presented more than one RR estimate to different types
of caffeine-containingbeveragesfor the same reference
category. Maia and coworkers published a case-control
study in which exposure was assessed twenty-years be-
fore outcome deﬁnition [28]; the work by Broe et al.
was also a case-control [17], but did not specify the
period to which exposure assessment referred, and the
remaining three studies refer to cohort designs [21,24,
25]. The risk of dementia (as deﬁned by the authors) or
cognitive impairment was assessed in 3 studies. Laita-
la and collaborators deﬁned the outcomes according to
the scores obtained on two sets of cognitive tests de-
signed to be applied by telephone interview [20]. Two
other studies used the DSM-IV clinical criteria [21,22].
The MMSE was used in two longitudinal studies
designed to assess cognitive decline and impairment
over a 5 and 1.5-year period, in Portuguese [16] and
Chinese [19] populations, respectively. Ritchie et al.
had used the MMSE, as well as other complementary
neuropsychological tests, to deﬁne decline in cognitive
performance [22].
The summary RR for the association between caf-
feine intake and different measures of cognitive im-
pairment/decline was 0.84 (95% Conﬁdence Interval:
0.72–0.99),with moderate heterogeneity(I 2 = 42.6%).
The visual inspection of the funnel plot (Fig. 4) shows
no evidence of publication bias, as the results from in-
dividual studies scatter around the overall summary RR
estimate depicting a funnel-like shape with no mean-
ingful asymmetry. The Egger’s regression asymme-
try test (p = 0.277) and the Begg adjusted rank corre-
lation test (p = 0.784) provide further support to the
hypothesis of no publication bias.
The two case-control studies provided the strongest
negative associations [17,28], corresponding to a sum-
mary RR of 0.49 (95% CI: 0.308–0.791; I 2 = 33.0%).

S200
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
When consideringonly the nine cohort studies the sum-
mary RR was 0.93 (95% CI: 0.83–1.04) and results
were homogeneous (I2 = 0.0%). Among the cohort
designs, the study by Ritchie et al. [22] is highly inﬂu-
ential, with a weight of 60% in the overall RR estimate.
When the more inﬂuential study is excluded, summary
RR for all studies was 0.77 (95% CI: 0.63–0.95, I2 =
34.7%), and the summary RR for cohort studies was
0.85 (95% CI: 0.71–1.01, I2 = 0.0%) The sample eval-
uated by Tyas et al. [24] partially overlapped with the
larger one studied by Lindsay and colleagues [25], but
had a small weight in the overall estimates and its ex-
clusion did not change the overall conclusions mean-
ingfully.
The summary RR was 0.83 (95% CI: 0.32–2.15,I 2 =
40.5%) for Alzheimer’s disease, although it combines
estimates from 2 case-control and 2 cohort studies, and
0.98 (95% CI: 0.87–1.11, I2 = 40.5%) for cognitive
decline, but results are drivenpredominantlyby a single
large study [22].
The studies by Lammi et al. [29] and van Gelder et
al. [30] did not provideRR estimates for the association
between caffeine and dementia. The latter suggests a
protectiveeffect, althoughonly a correlationcoefﬁcient
was used to quantify the association, and the former a
protective effect with a J-shaped pattern.
The studies considered for meta-analysis provided
estimates adjusted for different potential confounding
factors and for a varying number of variables, but there
was no clear pattern regarding the degree of confound-
ing control and the RR estimates. The summary RR
was 0.80 (95% CI: 0.59–1.08, I2 = 51.6%) when con-
sidering only 5 studies (7 RR estimates), providingRRs
adjusted for both smoking and hypertension, and 0.90
(95% CI: 0.76–1.06) for the remaining 4 studies (5 RR
estimates).
Regarding the relation between levels of exposure to
caffeine and the RR estimates (Fig. 5a), results were
more heterogeneous for lower intakes, albeit the pre-
ponderant role of the study published by Ritchie and
colleagues [22] in this particular analysis, but were al-
so more likely to be inversely associated with the out-
comes.
Survival bias is likely to occur in non-inception co-
horts, and is expectedly stronger in older cohorts [31].
The extent to which a complete follow-up is not
achieved also reﬂects selection bias, in addition to the
latter. Changes in caffeine consumption habits with
time and with the developmentof cognitive impairment
may contribute to information bias, especially when
follow-up periods are longer. Cohort studies including
younger participants, having longer or more complete
follow-ups, yielded more homogeneous results and the
putative protective role of caffeine was more evident in
those enrolling older individuals, when follow-up was
more complete or shorter (Figs 5b, 5c and 5d). How-
ever, no linear relation or other consistent pattern was
observed between log RR estimates and age of the co-
hort participants, follow-up duration or completeness
of follow-up.
DISCUSSION
This systematic review and meta-analysis updates a
previous quantitativesynthesis based in a small number
of studies and provides a summary of the best avail-
able evidence on this topic. The large methodological
heterogeneity across a still limited number of reports is
probably the most remarkable observation in our study,
which precludes robust and deﬁnite statements on a
possible negative association between caffeine intake
and dementia.
The conclusions reached by systematic reviews and
meta-analyses depend, among other factors, on the
comprehensiveness of the search strategy and on the
criteria for study inclusion and selection of data for
quantitative synthesis. These issues have implications
in the validity of our ﬁndings and deserve further dis-
cussion.
The number of studies available for review was
small, namely when compared to the 43 reported
included in a recent meta-analysis on smoking and
Alzheimer’s disease [32]. However, studies on the eti-
ologic role of caffeine intake are less frequent than
those focusing on the effects of tobacco, as shown in
two meta-analyses addressing the association between
coffee drinking, cigarette smoking and Parkinson’s dis-
ease, with 13 and 48 individual studies, respective-
ly [33]. Furthermore, there was no evidence of publi-
cation bias.
Two studies [29,30] did not provide RR estimates
for the association between caffeine and dementia, both
suggesting a protective effect, but no changes in the
conclusions of the present review and meta-analysis
would be expected if these studies could be included,
giventhe large heterogeneityobservedacross the inves-
tigations. Two reports providing only a cross-sectional
assessment of the association between caffeine intake
and dementia [34,35] were not included in the review
since the RR estimates were likely to be biased, be-
cause in participants cognitively impaired the exposure

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S201
information was obtained by self-report. One of these
studies concluded that caffeine intake was associated
with a better cognitive performance in tests evaluat-
ing reaction time, incidental verbal memory and visuo-
spatial reasoning [35]. The study by Johnson-Kozlow
et al. suggested a relation between higher current caf-
feine consumptionanda better performancein two cog-
nitive tests (Short Term Recall and Blessed Items) in
women [34].
The number of studies on this topic was small and
heterogeneous regarding the methodological options.
Four different outcomes were investigated in eleven re-
ports (Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, cognitiveimpair-
ment, and cognitive decline), and with the exception
of Alzheimer’s disease, the instruments and criteria for
outcome deﬁnition in each report were also heteroge-
neous. The food sources and chosen categories of ex-
posure also differed widely across studies. Under these
circumstances, and taking into account that the same
study frequently addresses more than one outcome and
presents different deﬁnitions of exposure, the criteria
used for selection of a RR single estimate from each
study is an important determinant of the validity of our
conclusions. To select independent observations to be
combined in meta-analysis we opted for the more pre-
cise estimates from each study, regardless of the corre-
sponding sources and levels of exposure and outcomes
assessed. The precision of the individual RR estimates
is not dependent on the direction of the association,
and with this criterion the selection of the exposures
corresponding to the largest number of participants is
the most likely. However, if the categories of exposure
in each individual study are deﬁned to include a similar
number of participants per group, this criterion leads to
the selection of the estimates reﬂecting the weakest as-
sociations, which may have contributed to a slight un-
derestimation of the summary RR. On the other hand,
the precision of the summary estimates is reduced by
considering only part of the overall sample from each
study in the meta-analysis. Sensitivity analysis extends
the assessment of the robustness of the summary esti-
mates across different inclusion criteria, as well as the
discussion of the methodological heterogeneity.
Two case-control studies assessed exposure through
surrogate informants, and were therefore eligible for
our review; however, misclassiﬁcation of exposure as
well as information bias weaken this methodological
approach, especially when a long-term recall of expo-
sure is required. Furthermore, in the case-control study
conductedby Broe and collaborators[17], the recall pe-
riod was not provided and only the potential confound-
ing effects of age and gender were accountedfor, which
precludes a sound discussion of the extent to which re-
call bias and uncontrolled confounding could have in-
ﬂuenced validity of the OR estimates. The exclusion of
the case-control studies in sensitivity analysis allowed
a meta-analysis of homogeneous results.
Even though Tyas et al. [24] and Lindsay et al. [25]
partly share their cohorts of participants, there is a
stronger protective effect described for tea in the ﬁrst
case, in a predominantly rural setting, whereas in the
second case coffee is the substance associated with a
lesser cognitive decline. This may be related to other
habits associated with the predominant caffeine intake
source; in the study by Lindsay and coworkers [25],
the population was essentially urban and this differ-
ence may partly account for the results. Nevertheless,
the wide categories of exposure used in analysis (daily
regular consumption vs. irregular consumption) pre-
cluded a ﬁner assessment of the relation between caf-
feine intake and Alzheimer’s disease. A Chinese cohort
study evaluating coffee and tea separately and adjust-
ing mutually for these two sources of caffeine showed
that total tea intake was signiﬁcantly associated with
a lower prevalence of cognitive impairment, although
no protective effect was observed for coffee consump-
tion [19].
In this population, coffee intake was the
most commonly consumed caffeine-containing bever-
age, despite the high proportion of drinkers of different
types of tea. The results could be due to the fact that
other components rather than caffeine may also exert a
role on cognitivedecline, but in addition to this Chinese
study [19], only Tyas et al. [24] showed associations in
different directions for coffee and tea.
Among cohort investigations the summary RR esti-
mate is driven predominantly by the study conducted by
Ritchie and coworkers [22], which showed no signiﬁ-
cant association between decline in MMSE score and
caffeineintake. However, a protectiveeffect of caffeine
was observed in women, both for verbal and visuospa-
tial memory performances (> 3 units of caffeine/day
vs. < 1 unit of caffeine/day: OR = 0.67; 95% CI, 0.53–
0.85, for verbal memory; OR = 0.82; 95% CI, 0.65–
1.03, for visuospatial memory). If these estimates had
been selected for our meta-analysis a stronger protec-
tive effect would had been achieved. The remaining co-
hort studies have similar weights in meta-analysis and
the exclusion of the highly inﬂuential study by Ritchie
et al.- yields a stronger risk reduction associated with
caffeine intake.
The most recently published cohort study, conduct-
ed by Laitala et al. [20], relied on two validated neu-

S202
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
ropsychological tests [Telephone Interview for Cogni-
tive Status (TICS) and Telephone Assessment for De-
mentia (TELE)] to classify participants in relationtode-
mentia or cognitive impairment, but none of the widely
adopted clinical criteria were used, and no signiﬁcant
protective effect of caffeine was observed. However,
the RR estimate selected for meta-analysis according
to previously established criteria was one of the lowest.
If other estimates had been selected, the negative asso-
ciation suggested by the summary RR estimate would
have been slightly weaker. The studies by Eskelinen et
al. [21] and Santos et al. [16] provide RR estimates for
different outcomes, but no substantial changes in the
summary estimate would have been observed if other
individual RR estimates had been selected from each
study, except if the levels of exposure considered were
different. The differences in the relation between caf-
feine intake and cognitive function observed in these
studies, according to the levels of exposure, depict one
of the sources of heterogeneity across cohort studies.
The small number of heterogeneous studies preclud-
ed a formal trend estimation analysis, but Fig. 5a al-
lows a systematic approach to the discussion of the
dose-response relationship. The results from studies
providing RR estimates for different levels of exposure
suggest a stronger protective effect for lower consump-
tions, despite the limited number of studies and the
large weight of the study conducted by Ritchie and col-
leagues do not allow stronger inferences on this issue.
The cohort study conducted by van Gelder et al. was
not included in meta-analysis because no RR estimates
are provided, but reported an inverse J-shaped associ-
ation between the number of cups of coffee consumed
and cognitive decline, with the least decline for three
cups a day [30]. The case-control study by Broe et
al. [17] provided RR estimates for consumers of more
than 4 cups/day vs. consumers of 4 or less cups/day
and allowed the computation of estimates for lifetime
vs. non consumers, showing a protective effect for cof-
fee intake, but a deleterious effect for the consumption
of large amounts. A J-shaped relation may therefore be
hypothesized,but uncontrolledor residual confounding
are also likely explanations for such a pattern.
Cohort designs are less prone to information bias,
but also have potential limitations related to survival
bias due to the enrollment of non-inception cohorts,
and selection bias resulting from incomplete follow-up.
Studies less likely to suffer from these biases tended
to show weaker negative or even positive associations
between caffeine intake and dementia. On the other
hand, information bias may also be a concern, especial-
ly in studies with longer follow-up, as caffeine intake
habits may decrease with time as cognitive impairment
occurs, and a protective effect of caffeine was more
likely in studies with shorter follow-up.
None of the studies assessed the relation between
duration of exposure to caffeine and dementia or cog-
nitive decline, and the timing of exposure evaluation
is also a source of heterogeneity across studies. The
change in caffeine intake habits over time is difﬁcult
to disentangle from the choice of the most appropriate
moment to assess exposure, from a biological plausi-
bility point of view. Because there are no deﬁnite data
as to when caffeine may start exerting its putative role
on neurodegeneration, the lag between caffeine expo-
sure and its potential effects on cognitive performance
cannot be accurately determined for the time being.
The evaluation of non-inception cohorts is of partic-
ular concern in longitudinal studies recruiting older in-
dividuals. Because participants suffering from chronic
illnesses are more likely to die before being recruited,
this will probably lead to an under-representation of
individuals at a high risk of cognitive impairment in
the cohort. Depending on their caffeine consumption
habits and coexisting dementia risk factors, this could
lead to biased estimates of risk.
Hypertension and
smoking are especially important in this discussion; the
relation between hypertension and coffee is complex,
but it is well recognized that hypertensive patients are
less likely to drink coffee due to public perception is-
sues [36]. Because hypertension is a well known risk
factor for dementia, the exclusion of such individuals
could lead to an underestimation of the protective ef-
fect of caffeine in cognitive decline. On the other hand,
smokers tend to drink more coffee, are more prone to
suffer from chronic illnesses and have a higher mortali-
ty rate [32]. Assuming that less ﬁt individuals are more
likely to become cognitively impaired, excluding them
from study cohorts could lead to an overestimation of
the protective effect exerted by caffeine.
The knowledge of caffeine pharmacokinetics is im-
portant when discussing its potential neuroprotective
role.
Caffeine half-life is reduced in smokers [37],
which may contribute to a weaker protective effect
in tobacco consumers, under the same caffeine expo-
sures. As smoking is associated with coffee consump-
tion, the latter effect is more likely in men, among
whom the prevalence of tobacco consumption tends to
be higher [38], in accordance with the observation of
a stronger protective effect of caffeine in women by
some authors [16,19,22]. Hormonal replacement ther-
apy (HRT) could also interfere with caffeine metabo-

C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
S203
lization and constitute another possible explanation for
differences between men and post-menopausal wom-
en. Studies conducted by Ascherio and coworkers ad-
dressing caffeine intake and Parkinson’s disease have
shown an increasing risk in women on HRT and with
higher caffeine intake habits [13]. Regarding cognitive
deterioration, Ritchie and collaborators found no inter-
action between caffeine and HRT [22], but there was
no additional data on this issue in the remaining articles
reviewed.
Two studies analyzed the potential effect of apolipo-
protein E (APOE) gene polymorphisms in the asso-
ciation between caffeine and dementia.
The results
obtained through stratiﬁcation according to the APOE
ε4 allele carrier status by Eskelinen et al. suggest a
stronger protective effect in APOE ε4 allele carriers
(carriers: moderate consumption vs. low consumption:
OR = 0.32, 95% CI 0.11–0.92; non-carriers: moderate
consumption vs. low consumption: OR = 0.44, 95%
CI 0.12–1.55) [21]. In the study by Ng et al., the neg-
ative association between tea consumption and cogni-
tive decline in the category deﬁned as “high intake” did
not change meaningfully after adjustment for APOE ε4
allele carrier status (OR = 0.57 95% CI 0.32–1.03 after
adjustment vs. OR = 0.62 95% CI 0.36–1.08 before
adjustment) [19].
Caffeine consumption is signiﬁcantly associated
with a wide range of variables also known as being
related to cognitive decline [22]. Vascular risk factors,
age, education and depressive symptoms are among
the ones generally agreed upon.
It is thus relevant
to account for these variables as potential confound-
ing factors, which was accomplished in most stud-
ies [16,19–21], although to different extents. Uncon-
trolled or residual confounding and effect modiﬁcation
not accounted for in the majority of studies reviewed
may contribute to explain the heterogeneous results,
although no formal assessment of these effects is pos-
sible due to the small number of highly heterogeneous
reports.
Finally, a problem inherent to all dementia research
designs is the accuracy of diagnosis. All the studies
reviewed rely either on a clinical diagnosis or on neu-
ropsychological test scores. Because the deﬁnite diag-
nosis of dementia requires pathological examination,
misclassiﬁcation is likely to have contributed to biased
results [39]. However, the speciﬁcity and sensitivity of
clinical diagnosis are poorly known and it is recognized
that they differ according to the type of dementia (e.g.,
vascular, Alzheimer’s disease) and the criteria used [40,
41]. This reafﬁrms the importance of internationally
consensual criteria for clinical diagnosis of dementia in
epidemiological research.
In conclusion, further prospective studies evaluating
the association between caffeine consumption and cog-
nitive decline are needed. Addressing the potential bias
and confounding sources described above is essential.
Setting consensual criteria for the deﬁnition of outcome
as well as creating deﬁned categories and types of ex-
posure might be useful in conducting meta-analyses,
and increase statistical power for the detection of an
association between caffeine and cognitive impairment
or dementia.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
Authors’ disclosures available online (http://www.j-
alz.com/disclosures/view.php?id=275).
REFERENCES
[1]
Farlow M (2007) Alzheimer’s Disease. In Continuum Lifelong
Learning in Neurology – Dementia, A. Miller ed. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 39-63.
[2]
World Health Organization,
Global Burden of Disease,
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global burden disease/GBD
report 2004update full.pdf, Last updated 2009, Accessed on
November 04, 2009.
[3]
World Health Organization,
Global Burden of Disease,
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global burden disease/DALY
Inc 2030.xls, Last updated 2009, Accessed on November 04,
2009.
[4]
Olesen J, Baker MG, Freund T, di Luca M, Mendlewicz J, Ra-
gan I, Westphal M (2006) Consensus document on European
brain research. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 77(Suppl 1),
i1-49.
[5]
Patterson C, Feightner JW, Garcia A, Hsiung GY, MacKnight
C, Sadovnick AD (2008) Diagnosis and treatment of demen-
tia: 1. Risk assessment and primary prevention of Alzheimer
disease. CMAJ 178, 548-556.
[6]
Kivipelto M, Rovio S, Ngandu T, Kareholt I, Eskelinen M,
Winblad B, Hachinski V, Cedazo-Minguez A, Soininen H,
Tuomilehto J (2008) Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 magniﬁes
lifestyle risks for dementia: a population-based study. J Cell
Mol Med 12, 2762-2771.
[7]
Qiu C, De Ronchi D, Fratiglioni L (2007) The epidemiology
of dementias: an update. Curr Opin Psychiatry 20, 380-385.
[8]
Qiu C, Kivipelto M, von Strauss E (2009) Epidemiology of
Alzheimer’s disease: occurrence, determinants, and strategies
toward intervention. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 11, 111-128.
[9]
Gillette Guyonnet S, Abellan Van Kan G, Andrieu S, Barberger
Gateau P, Berr C, Bonnefoy M, Dartigues JF, de Groot L, Ferry
M, Galan P (2007) IANA task force on nutrition and cognitive
decline with aging. J Nutr Health Aging 11, 132-152.
[10]
Yoshimura H (2005) The potential of caffeine for functional
modiﬁcation from cortical synapses to neuron networks in the
brain. Curr Neuropharmacol 3, 309-316.

S204
C. Santos et al. / Caffeine Intake and Dementia: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
[11]
Canas PM, Porciuncula LO, Cunha GM, Silva CG, Macha-
do NJ, Oliveira JM, Oliveira CR, and Cunha RA (2009)
Adenosine A2A receptor blockade prevents synaptotoxicity
and memory dysfunction caused by beta-amyloid peptides via
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. J Neurosci 29,
14741-14751.
[12]
Tebano MT, Martire A, Rebola N, Pepponi R, Domenici MR,
Gro MC, Schwarzschild MA, Chen JF, Cunha RA, and Popoli
P (2005) Adenosine A2A receptors and metabotropic gluta-
mate 5 receptors are co-localized and functionally interact in
the hippocampus: a possible key mechanism in the modulation
of N-methyl-D-aspartate effects. J Neurochem 95, 1188-1200.
[13]
Ascherio A, Chen H (2003) Caffeinated clues from epidemi-
ology of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 61(11 Suppl 6), S51-
54.
[14]
Chen JF, Xu K, Petzer JP, Staal R, Xu YH, Beilstein M, Son-
salla PK, Castagnoli K, Castagnoli N Jr, Schwarzschild MA
(2001) Neuroprotection by caffeine and A(A2) adenosine re-
ceptor inactivation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. J Neu-
rosci 21, RC143.
[15]
Barranco Quintana JL, Allam MF, Serrano Del Castillo A,
Fernandez-Crehuet Navajas R (2007) Alzheimer’s disease and
coffee: a quantitative review. Neurol Res 29, 91-95.
[16]
Santos C, Lunet N, Azevedo A, de Mendonc¸a A, Ritchie K,
Barros H (2010) Caffeine intake is associated with a lower
risk of cognitive decline: A cohort study from portugal. J
Alzheimers Dis 20(Supplement), 175-185.
[17]
Broe GA, Henderson AS, Creasey H, McCusker E, Korten AE,
Jorm AF, Longley W, Anthony JC (1990) A case-control study
of Alzheimer’s disease in Australia. Neurology 40, 1698-1707.
[18]
Rothman KJ, Greenland S, Lash TL (2008) Case-control stud-
ies. In Modern Epidemiology, Rothman KJ, Greenland S, Lash
TL, eds. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia pp. 111-
127.
[19]
Ng TP, Feng L, Niti M, Kua EH, Yap KB (2008) Tea consump-
tion and cognitive impairment and decline in older Chinese
adults. Am J Clin Nutr 88, 224-231.
[20]
Laitala VS, Kaprio J, Koskenvuo M, Raiha I, Rinne JO, Sil-
ventoinen K (2009) Coffee drinking in middle age is not asso-
ciated with cognitive performance in old age. Am J Clin Nutr
90, 640-646.
[21]
Eskelinen MH, Ngandu T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto
M (2009) Midlife coffee and tea drinking and the risk of late-
life dementia: a population-based CAIDE study. J Alzheimers
Dis, 16, 85-91.
[22]
Ritchie K, Carriere I, de Mendonc¸a A, Portet F, Dartigues
JF, Rouaud O, Barberger-Gateau P, Ancelin ML (2007) The
neuroprotective effects of caffeine: a prospective population
study (the Three City Study). Neurology 69, 536-545.
[23]
Higgins JP, Thompson SG (2002) Quantifying heterogeneity
in a meta-analysis. Stat Med 21, 1539-1558.
[24]
Tyas SL, Manfreda J, Strain LA, Montgomery PR (2001) Risk
factors for Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based, longitu-
dinal study in Manitoba, Canada. Int J Epidemiol 30, 590-597.
[25]
Lindsay J, Laurin D, Verreault R, Hebert R, Helliwell B, Hill
GB, McDowell I (2002) Risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease:
a prospective analysis from the Canadian Study of Health and
Aging. Am J Epidemiol 156, 445-453.
[26]
Begg CB, Mazumdar M (1994) Operating characteristics of a
rank correlation test for publication bias. Biometrics 50, 1088-
1101.
[27]
Egger M, Davey Smith G, Schneider M, Minder C (1997) Bias
in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. BMJ 315,
629-634.
[28]
Maia L, de Mendonc¸a A (2002) Does caffeine intake protect
from Alzheimer’s disease? Eur J Neurol 9, 377-382.
[29]
Lammi UK, Kivela SL, Nissinen A, Punsar S, Puska P, Karvo-
nen M (1989) Mental disability among elderly men in Finland:
prevalence, predictors and correlates. Acta Psychiatr Scand
80, 459-468.
[30]
van Gelder BM, Buijsse B, Tijhuis M, Kalmijn S, Giampaoli
S, Nissinen A, Kromhout D (2007) Coffee consumption is
inversely associated with cognitive decline in elderly European
men: the FINE Study. Eur J Clin Nutr 61, 226-232.
[31]
Hernan MA, Alonso A, Logroscino G (2008) Cigarette smok-
ing and dementia: potential selection bias in the elderly. Epi-
demiology 19, 448-450.
[32]
Cataldo JK, Prochaska JJ, Glantz SA (2010) Cigarette smok-
ing is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease: An Analysis con-
trolling for tobacco industry afﬁliation. J Alzheimer Dis 19,
465-480.
[33]
Hernan MA, Takkouche B, Caamano-Isorna F, Gestal-Otero JJ
(2002) A meta-analysis of coffee drinking, cigarette smoking,
and the risk of Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 52, 276-284.
[34]
Johnson-Kozlow M, Kritz-Silverstein D, Barrett-Connor E,
Morton D (2002) Coffee consumption and cognitive function
among older adults. Am J Epidemiol 156, 842-850.
[35]
Jarvis MJ (1993) Does caffeine intake enhance absolute levels
of cognitive performance? Psychopharmacology (Berl) 110,
45-52.
[36]
Takashima Y, Iwase Y, Yoshida M, Kokaze A, Takagi Y,
Taubono Y, Tsugane S, Takahashi T, Iitoi Y, Akabane M (1998)
Relationship of food intake and dietary patterns with blood
pressure levels among middle-aged Japanese men. J Epidemiol
8, 106-115.
[37]
Benowitz NL, Hall SM, Modin G (1989) Persistent increase
in caffeine concentrations in people who stop smoking. BMJ
298, 1075-1076.
[38]
Santos AC, Barros H (2004) Smoking patterns in a community
sample of Portuguese adults, 1999-2000. Prev Med 38, 114-
119.
[39]
Martin EM, Wilson RS, Penn RD, Fox JH, Clasen RA, Savoy
SM (1987) Cortical biopsy results in Alzheimer’s disease:
correlation with cognitive deﬁcits. Neurology 37, 1201-1204.
[40]
Gay BE, Taylor KI, Hohl U, Tolnay M, Staehelin HB (2008)
The validity of clinical diagnoses of dementia in a group of
consecutively autopsied memory clinic patients. J Nutr Health
Aging 12, 132-137.
[41]
Gold G, Giannakopoulos P, Montes-Paixao Junior C, Her-
rmann FR, Mulligan R, Michel JP, Bouras C (1997) Sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of newly proposed clinical criteria for possible
vascular dementia. Neurology 49, 690-694.
