A Specialty Coffee Association Report
Carbon and Coffee: 
GHG Emission Reductions 
Progress and Strategies 
Across the Value Chain

“Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value 
Chain” is owned by the Specialty Coffee Association (SCA). Permission is granted to 
reproduce this report partially or completely, with the consent of and attribution to the SCA. 
© 2022 the Specialty Coffee Association 
Research Team and Principal Authors
Nora Burkey, Founder and Executive Director, The Chain Collaborative (Research Lead)
Dr. Cinzia Fissore, Associate Professor and Program Coordinator of Environmental Science 
Program, Whittier College (Research Lead)
Duncan Charboneau, Whittier College, 2023 Graduate
Nona Golden, Whittier College, 2022 Graduate 
Allison Lou, Whittier College, 2022 Graduate 
Publication Team
Kim Elena Ionescu, Chief Sustainability and Knowledge Officer, SCA 
(Conceptualization and Review)
Julie Housh, Knowledge Manager (2021), SCA (Conceptualization)
Jenn Rugolo, Curatorial Director, SCA (Editing, Visualization, and Project Coordination)
Andrés Montenegro, Sustainability Director, SCA (Review)
Grace Freeman, Communications Coordinator, SCA (Communications)
Alex Synge, The First 47 (Visualization and Design) 
Additional Support 
Karla Boza, Program Fellow, The Chain Collaborative (Fact-Checking)
Grace Heifetz, Intern, The Chain Collaborative (Fact-Checking, Research, and Review)
Camila Khalifé, Program Fellow, The Chain Collaborative (Fact-Checking and Translation)
Carolina Pirola, Program Fellow, The Chain Collaborative 
(Fact-Checking, Research, Review, and Translation)
Ella Taylor, Development and Communications Assistant, The Chain Collaborative 
(Conceptualization: Literature Review)
Acknowledgements 
The research team would like to thank the Arthur Vining Davis Foundation for  
their grant to Dr. Cinzia Fissore, which partly funded this research.
2
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain

3
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Table of Contents
About This Report
Purpose
Introduction
Approach and Methodology
Limitations
Phase One: Literature Review	
About This Phase
Key Findings
GHG Emissions from Agriculture
Coffee’s Carbon Footprint
Phase Two: Industry Research & Analysis
About This Phase
Key Findings
Accounting Methods
Common Strategies
Carbon Sequestration
Carbon Credits
Challenges and Opportunities
Fossil Fuel Reliance
Transition to Renewables
Data Sharing and Accurate Accounting
Phase Three: Survey Findings
About This Phase
Key Findings
Industry Perspectives
A Critically Important Issue
Preference for Land-Based Approaches
Challenges Ahead
Lack of Clarity: Impact 
and Reduction 
Underutilization of Offsetting 
Significant Gaps
4
4
5
6
7
8
8
8
9
11
15
15
15
16
16
16
17
18
18 
18 
19
21
21
21
22
22
22
24
24
25
26
Phase Four: Interview Findings
About This Phase
Key Findings
Existing Challenges
Lack of Standardization Leads 
to Further Issues
Difficulty of Quantifying 
Scope 3 Emissions
Looking Ahead	
A Need for Targeted Financing
Payment for Ecosystem Services
Conclusion: Recommendations  
and Case Studies
Recommendations
Case Studies
San Francisco Bay Coffee
Acorn/Rabobank
Cooperative Coffees
Solidaridad
Glossary
Bibliography
27
27
27
28
28
28
29
29
29
31
33
34
34
36
38
40
43
45

About This Report 
Purpose
Climate change has widespread effects on coffee production, impacting 
the entire value chain, from producers to consumers. Effective solutions 
necessitate not only a renewed environmental focus, but also the close 
consideration of economic and social factors. It is now more important than 
ever for the industry to come together to discuss these solutions and factors, 
and share their collective knowledge and expertise for the benefit of all, but 
particularly in support of the most vulnerable: the small-scale agricultural 
producers who constitute the majority of coffee growers worldwide.
In 2016, the SCA identified carbon footprint measurement and reporting 
as one of five key recommendations to address climate change in a white 
paper, Climate Change and Coffee: Acting Globally and Locally.1 As time— 
and the climate crisis—has progressed, the SCA continued to note that 
gaps in our collective knowledge around carbon emissions reporting and 
reduction remained a significant challenge to companies seeking to engage 
in this kind of activity. 
This report aims to highlight some of the key tools, strategies, and best 
practices that coffee industry actors could adopt to achieve carbon 
emission reduction as well as encourage more targeted conversation about 
verifiable methods and outcomes, in order to increase proven and positive 
action on climate change throughout the entire coffee sector.
1	
Specialty Coffee Association. 
Climate Change and Coffee: 
Acting Globally and Locally 
(2016).
4
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain

5
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Introduction
The ongoing threat of climate change, and 
the impact it is expected to have on coffee 
yields worldwide, is of particular concern  
to the global coffee sector in 2022. 
According to recent reports, climate change is continuing to affect land 
patterns, making existing coffee land less compatible with production, 
and resulting yields less robust. If production practices and related 
technologies do not adapt, this issue is also likely to cause producers to 
abandon the cultivation of their coffee altogether, further decreasing 
agricultural output.2 Such projected decrease in both land availability 
and yields coincides with an anticipation of sustained growth related to 
the global demand for coffee, which is expected to drive cultivation to 
new areas, leading to increased deforestation and the destruction of 
forest ecosystems.
Meeting the current demand forecast would require at least doubling 
the current levels of coffee production within the next 30 years.3 If this 
new production is to be met through deforestation and full-sun modes 
of cultivation—as anticipated—the inherent risk to primary forests as 
well as intact natural habitats is potentially substantial. Meanwhile, 
since deforestation and intensified agriculture also increase carbon and 
other greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, estimates suggest that, without 
considered action to mitigate GHG emissions, the coffee sector will be 
responsible for emitting 1.65 to 3.3 gigatons (Gt) of carbon by the year 
2050.4 This, in turn, will worsen the effect of climate change on coffee 
yields and could lead to even more deforestation.
In light of this harmful and destructive cycle, preservation of forest, climate 
adaptation and mitigation, and substantial carbon emission reduction 
have all become key goals for many companies worldwide. Specifically, 
a number of actors within the coffee industry have already taken steps 
to reduce their carbon footprint or achieve carbon neutrality, as they are 
keenly aware that ongoing emissions will exacerbate the challenges of 
climate change. They further understand that there is potential for carbon 
sequestration and overall carbon emission reduction at the farm level as 
well as throughout the entire value chain.
Several tools and strategies have been deployed in the last decade to 
support actors in mitigating carbon emissions and reducing the carbon 
footprint of certain actions. However, an increased exchange of ideas and 
opportunities between members of the coffee industry is needed, so that 
those who have successfully reduced their carbon footprint can share their 
knowledge and perspective with others. In response to this need, The Chain 
3	
Sjoerd Panhuysen and Joost 
Pierrot, “Coffee Barometer 
2018,” Hivos.
4	
Sjoerd Panhuysen and Joost 
Pierrot, “Coffee Barometer 
2020,” Hivos (p20).
2	
Dr. Katalin Solymosi and Grit 
Techel, “Brewing up Climate 
Resilience in the Coffee Sector: 
Adaptation Strategies for Farm-
ers, Plantations, and Producers,” 
2019.

6
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Collaborative, in partnership with the Specialty Coffee Association (SCA) 
and the Environmental Science Program at Whittier College, launched a 
qualitative and quantitative research project in 2021. 
The end goal was to create an industry-wide report that would identify 
key tools, strategies, and best practices that coffee industry actors could 
adopt to successfully achieve carbon emission reduction. The present 
report is the result of this work. 
Approach and Methodology
This project was conducted between October 2021 and May 2022. In 2021, 
we (the lead researchers) met with members of SCA staff to design a 
research project that would answer the following question: What tools and 
strategies have companies and organizations within the coffee value chain 
adopted, or what tools and strategies do they plan to adopt, to measure 
and reduce their carbon and GHG emissions? We then developed a mixed-
methods methodology and scope of work to assist in recruiting three 
students from Whittier College to serve as members of the research team. 
Following the recruitment phase, the selected students were all onboarded 
in October 2021 to conduct four phases of work for the project.
The first phase consisted of a short literature review to assess the impact 
of and basic accounting methodologies for GHG from agriculture. The 
team also focused on the extent of GHG emissions in coffee to better 
contextualize data and definitions. 
The second phase of the research included a desk review and analysis of 
information available through the websites and downloadable reports 
of 49 organizations and companies working within the coffee sector. 
This phase culminated in the development of a data set documenting 
the carbon emission reduction efforts that have been either proposed or 
enacted, and that have been shared publicly online. 
The third phase saw the drafting of an online quantitative survey. Questions 
were geared toward understanding current best practices and available 
tools used to properly assess and reduce GHG emissions within the coffee 
value chain. The anonymous survey was advertised on various digital 
platforms (social media, e-newsletters, etc.) as well as through direct email 
outreach to several coffee industry contacts, which was facilitated by the 
SCA. In total, 22 people completed the survey, representing global traders, 
roasters, public sector organizations, civil society/non-profit organizations, 
advocacy organizations, and research institutions. 
Finally, conducted simultaneously with the third phase, the team’s 
fourth phase focused on the development and application of qualitative 
interviews to gather primary data and feedback from company and 
organization representatives. In total, nine institutions participated in 
the interviews, including representatives from sustainability-focused 
organizations, roasting companies, and trading companies. This report 

7
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
does not disclose the names of interviewees to respect the requests of 
several participants.
Limitations
The trends that emerged from this study are of great relevance for the 
coffee industry as a whole as they capture an array of best practices and 
tools that, taken together, can help the industry move forward in its efforts 
to reduce or eliminate carbon and other GHG emissions. However, it should 
be noted that the analysis presented here focuses primarily on large or 
multinational corporations, some of which are vertically integrated. There 
is value in learning from larger companies and organizations, of course, as 
these entities tend to have—in comparison to smaller entities—more funds 
they can leverage to engage in research or pilot projects. Though, given the 
focus on large companies, it remains unclear what specific limitations and 
roadblocks small enterprises, regardless of their position in the value chain, 
encounter. 
In addition, while the large companies and organizations reviewed in this 
study appear to be motivated to invest in carbon emission reduction 
practices at the level of production and cultivation, as well as throughout 
their entire value chain—evidenced through reported actions and financial 
intervention—the direct voice of growers is missing from this report. 
Finally, the survey and interview respondents account for a modest, albeit 
representative sample of the value chain. Survey response rates were 
lower than expected and it is unclear if this was due to limited visibility and 
outreach or other reasons that the researchers could not anticipate. Ideally, 
future iterations of this study should rely on more targeted outreach to 
obtain feedback that is as representative as possible of the variety of 
experiences throughout the coffee sector.

8
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Phase One:  
Literature Review
About This Phase 
Phase one of this research was conducted between October 2021 and 
May 2022 and consisted of a literature review of relevant peer-reviewed 
articles and reports pertaining to carbon and other GHG emissions as well 
as accounting methodologies for agricultural production. The focus was on 
agriculture overall as well as on coffee more specifically. The goal was to 
identify key terminology and accounting protocols that have large industry 
relevance. This phase also sought to define direct and indirect emissions 
as they are measured across the value stream and provide examples 
from the coffee sector. Lastly, phase one identified key studies that have 
investigated carbon emissions more broadly and carbon emission hotspots 
within the coffee value chain, which were used to evaluate potential 
discrepancies and inconsistencies across accounting methods. The 
literature review also allowed for the identification of areas of opportunity 
for further investigation in possible subsequent phases of this research. 
Key Findings 
Despite the diverse number of protocols available, the coffee industry 
seems to rely greatly on the Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHGP) developed 
in 1998 by the World Resources Institute and the World Business Council 
for Sustainable Development. The GHGP distinguishes GHG emission into 
three different scopes: direct GHG emissions (Scope 1), electricity indirect 
emissions (Scope 2), and all other indirect emissions (Scope 3).5 
Even with the GHGP, the coffee industry has struggled to quantify carbon 
footprint baselines for each scope due to a lack of standardization both 
across accounting tools and reporting methodologies, but also due to the 
variability and complexity of coffee’s global production and transport-
related activities in various contexts. Further adding to the difficulty of 
assessing carbon and other GHG emissions accurately across the entire 
supply chain is the sense that companies do not feel like they have all the 
information they need, requiring some data to be sourced from third-party 
accounting firms. Additionally, while existing sustainability certifications 
may encourage some activities that lead to emission reduction, there are 
no specific regulations on emissions in any certification, and no scheme 
currently requires carbon accounting, making this a relatively new endeavor 
for coffee sector actors. 
New legislation and the ongoing impacts of climate change confirm the 
pressing need to support companies and producers in reporting and 
5	
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A 
Corporate Accounting and Re-
porting Standard (Revised Edi-
tion), World Resources Institute 
and World Business Council 
for Sustainable Development, 
March 2004. 

9
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
reducing their carbon footprint, but the challenge of choosing the most 
effective tools and methodologies remains. 
GHG Emissions from Agriculture
The global agricultural sector is considered a substantial contributor to 
climate change.6 This is mainly due to GHG emissions that result from 
agricultural production, as well as from land-use change that destroys 
natural ecosystems (e.g., the conversion from forest to cultivated fields). 
Globally, agricultural production systems are estimated to contribute 
between 20% and 30% of total GHG emissions, according to various 
reports.7 While GHG emissions include water vapor, carbon dioxide (CO2), 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), ozone (O3), and fluorinated gasses, 
special emphasis is given to carbon dioxide (CO2) within the climate change 
discourse.8 This is due to the fact that anthropogenic emissions of CO2 into 
the atmosphere are the direct result of fossil fuel combustion and land use 
change, and also because, when CO2 is emitted into the atmosphere, it has 
the ability to persist for millennia. Consequently, the CO2 that has been 
emitted to date as a result of human activity continues to compound over 
time. This further exacerbates the climate change-related phenomena we 
see today: namely, of particular importance to this report, the continued 
release of CO2 into the atmosphere by contemporary agricultural 
production systems, such as coffee. Within coffee production, emissions of 
CO2 happen in multiple ways, including machinery fuel consumption, the 
production and transportation of fertilizers, and electricity use. Additional 
non-CO2 GHG contribute greatly to the overall footprint of diverse 
agricultural sectors, and these include methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide 
(N2O). Emissions of CH4 primarily derive from livestock production and 
fermentation processes, while N2O emissions are largely associated with 
manure and fertilizer application.
In any given sector, total GHG emissions derive from the combined 
contribution of various gasses (such as CO2, CH4, and N2O, each with 
different global warming potential).9 To facilitate accounting and to 
allow for comparisons, GHG emissions are converted into a common 
unit: the carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2eq). This normalizes the scale of 
emissions (e.g., individual, sector-wide, or country-specific) against the 
global warming potential (GWP) of CO2 and allows actors to refer to 
their combined GHG emissions, converted into CO2eq, as their “carbon 
footprint.” Importantly, within the coffee supply chain, both water and 
electricity consumption can be converted into CO2eq because of the GHG 
emissions associated with their production and treatment. However, 
while they can be accounted for as part of a company’s total carbon 
footprint, both are often reported by corporations as separate from, 
or in addition to, total GHG. This is partially because water scarcity is a 
global issue, and water itself is a highly regulated commodity that has 
specific considerations not covered in GHG accounting. Water reduction 
mandates are also frequently in place in high-risk countries or regions, 
further emphasizing the need for corporations to directly report on their 
6	
Pete Smith et al., “Agriculture, 
Forestry and Other Land Use 
(AFOLU),” in Climate Change 
2014: Mitigation of Climate 
Change: Contribution of 
Working Group III to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate 
Change, ed: Ottmar Edenhofer 
et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2014).
7	
John Lynch et al, “Agricul-
ture’s Contribution to Climate 
Change and Role in Mitigation 
Is Distinct from Predominantly 
Fossil CO2-Emitting Sectors,” 
Frontiers in Sustainable Food 
Systems, 03 (2014), DOI: 
10.3389/fsufs.2020.518039.
8	
According to the American 
Chemical Society, some GHG 
occur naturally as a result of 
natural processes (e.g., via or-
ganic material decomposition) 
and human activity (e.g., from 
fossil fuel use, heat production, 
and intensive agriculture). Oth-
er GHG have no natural sources 
and result from manufacturing 
and industrial processes. For 
more information, visit: Which 
Gases Are Greenhouse Gases? 
- American Chemical Society 
(acs.org).
9	
Both CH4 and N2O are powerful 
GHG, more potent than CO2 in 
trapping heat and contributing 
to climate change and global 
warming.

10
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
water reduction strategies. The intersection between energy and water 
consumption is additionally relevant, as reports indicate that switching to 
renewable energy sources could lead to significant reduction in water and 
other footprints, and consequently, in emissions of GHG.10 For this reason 
and more, corporations may want to demonstrate the specific impact of 
their reductions or changes in energy use. For example, a corporation may 
want to highlight significant reductions in energy use in a certain area or 
facility, rather than solely reporting the impact of these reductions on their 
overall emissions company-wide.
As accounting and reporting methodologies can be very diverse, there is a 
critical need for comprehensive and standardized corporate GHG emission 
accounting strategies and systems that are internationally recognized. 
In response to this need, the World Resources Institute, together with 
the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, generated 
the Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHGP) in 1998. This offers standardized 
tools to businesses and organizations to support the assessment of their 
own GHG emissions. It accounts for both direct and indirect emissions 
of any actor, categorizing them into three scopes (see Figure 1), and 
further distinguishes between product life cycle and corporate value chain 
emissions. The former relates to a particular product, such as a singular 
bag of roasted coffee, and follows the life of that specific product from 
raw material to use and disposal. Corporate value chain accounting 
and reporting, meanwhile, allows companies—such as a large roasting 
company—to assess all three scopes of their entire operation. In both 
cases, it is possible to identify opportunities for emissions reduction, 
but the corporate value chain approach is an internationally recognized 
method for companies wishing to account for their emissions and address 
their climate impact.11
10	  Thomas Hundertmark et al., 
“Water: A Human and Business 
Priority,” McKinsey, May 2020.
11	 “Corporate Value Chain (Scope 
3) Accounting and Reporting 
Standard,” World Resources 
Institute and World Business 
Council for Sustainable Devel-
opment, September 2011.

Figure 1. GHG Protocol Emission Scopes 1-3
Scope 1 refers to emissions from sources that a company or organization 
owns or directly controls. It would include, for example, the fossil fuels 
burned when roasting companies use their own trucks to transport bags of 
coffee to their retail shops. 
Scope 2 refers to emissions that a company or organization indirectly causes 
when they purchase or use energy. As such, it includes emissions related to 
the generation of electricity offsite. These are considered indirect emissions, 
because while a company can control how often they turn on their lights, 
they do not control the emissions generated by electricity providers. 
Finally, Scope 3 relates to emissions that are not produced by sources 
which are owned by a company or organization itself. Rather, Scope 3 
encompasses a variety of indirect GHG emissions that are associated with 
a corporation’s activities across an entire value chain, even if those are not 
under that corporation’s direct control—such as coffee growing, takeaway 
cup manufacture, wastewater production, etc. By and large, they can make 
up a vast majority of company emissions.
Scope 3 includes all GHG emissions not found within the first two scopes, 
and notably, was not designed within the GHGP to allow for comparison 
across companies or organizations. This is due to existing inconsistencies 
in methodologies and parameters used to assess specific sources of GHG 
throughout value chains. There is also a lack of clarity as to which actors are 
responsible for offsetting or reducing Scope 3 emissions, especially when 
these emissions can be shared (e.g., between companies who source from 
the same farms).
11
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Direct GHG 
emissions
Electricity 
indirect 
emissions
All indirect 
emissions
1
2
3
Emissions related to pruning, plant 
care, and on-farm processing, among 
others
Emissions from the production 
of purchased energy for milling 
operations, offices, etc. 
All emissions associated with the 
production of purchased inputs, 
including fertilizers, herbicides, etc. 
Emissions used to roast and 
transport coffee to/from shops 
or facilities directly owned by the 
company 
Emissions related to the 
generation of electricity for all 
electricity that was purchased to 
allow companies to operate their 
machines and facilities
All emissions generated from 
the production, processing, and 
importing of coffee, and the brewing 
and disposal of coffee, should 
roasting companies not directly own 
their own cafés or import operations
S C O P E
D E S C R I P T I O N
E X A M P L E S  ( P R O D U C I N G )
E X A M P L E S  ( R O A S T I N G )
GHG PROTOCOL EMISSION SCOPES

12
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Coffee’s Carbon Footprint
Global GHG emissions—be them from agriculture or any other sector—are 
contributing to climate change, causing higher global temperatures, and 
leading to reduced predictability of seasonal events. For example, present 
models predict that Mesoamerica is likely to be affected by lower rates of 
precipitation as a result of climate change—specifically, a 5% decrease in 
precipitation by 2050.12 This change in rainfall, alongside other realities of 
climate change, will have negative consequences for the yield and health of 
many crops, coffee included. El Salvador and Nicaragua, for instance, are 
expected to see a 40% or greater decrease in land suitable for agricultural 
production over the next three decades.13
Small-scale agricultural producers are particularly vulnerable to climatic 
events and changes, as well as to the subsequent decline in productivity 
and quality of crops.14 Climate risks also contribute to market volatility 
and price fluctuation, affecting actors up and down the coffee value chain 
in a variety of ways, especially those who are most resource insecure. As 
an example of this phenomenon, a drought in September 2020 followed 
by three frosts in Brazil led to a decline in production, contributing 
significantly to coffee price increases in 2021.15 While such potential 
impacts of climate change on agriculture, coffee, and livelihoods are well 
documented, specific sources of GHG emissions associated with coffee 
production in its entirety are not well defined. However, comprehensive 
carbon assessments specific to coffee production are emerging, and some 
point to the fact that available accounting tools have (to date) largely 
ignored certain key elements within the coffee production system—in 
particular, the potential for coffee to sequester carbon in soil and the 
differences in emissions related to farm management type, such as 
conventional versus organic and shaded versus non-shaded agricultural 
production.16
Additionally, there is disagreement among value chain actors and GHG 
specialists alike as to the average emission rates of certain activities. 
Among the studies attempting to locate emission “hotspots” within 
the coffee value chain, one study conducted research with 116 working 
farms (sizes unknown) in Mexico, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and 
Colombia, and concluded that, even accounting for diverse production 
systems, 35% of all CO2eq emissions in coffee production systems can 
be ascribed to fertilizer production. This study also suggested that post-
harvest management practices make up approximately 50% of the total 
carbon footprint of coffee at the farm level.17 Another study conducted 
in Costa Rica reported that, when taking into account the entire value 
chain, farm-level operations and milling together account for 43% of total 
emissions, while activities associated with consumption at the consumer 
level account for 46% of all emissions.18 Other studies, however, argue that 
the most significant sources of emissions derive from coffee cultivation 
and production, not from the level of consumption.19 Discrepancies 
in accounting for carbon and GHG emissions such as these are not 
12	 Maria Baca et al., “An Integrat-
ed Framework for Assessing 
Vulnerability to Climate Change 
and Developing Adaptation 
Strategies for Coffee Growing 
Families in Mesoamerica,” PLoS 
ONE 9(2): e88463 (2014), DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0088463.
13	 Baca et al, “Integrated Frame-
work in Mesoamerica.”
14	 Eric Rahn et al., “Climate 
Change Adaptation, Mitiga-
tion, and Livelihood Benefits in 
Coffee Production: Where are 
the Synergies?” Mitigation and 
Adaptation Strategies for Glob-
al Change, 19 (2013):1119-1137.
15	 Nora Burkey and Elisa Criscione, 
“Algrano Market Trends Review: 
Coffee Sourcing and Production 
Trends in the Context of a New 
Price Boom,” Algrano, 2022.
16	 Umesh Acharya and Rattan Lal, 
“Carbon Accounting for Cof-
fee-Based Farming Systems,” 
World Coffee Research, 2021.
17	 Henk Rikxoort et al., “Carbon 
Footprints and Carbon Stocks 
Reveal Climate-Friendly Coffee 
Production,” Agronomy for 
Sustainable Development, 34 
(4) (2014): 887-897.
18	 Bernard Kilian et al., “Carbon 
Footprint Across the Coffee 
Supply Chain: The Case of 
Costa Rican Coffee,” Journal of 
Agricultural Science and Tech-
nology, Volume 3 (2013): 151-175.
19	 Harry Hassard et al., “Product 
Carbon Footprint Product and 
Energy Analysis of Alternative 
Coffee Products in Japan,” 
Journal of Cleaner Produc-
tion, 73 (2014) :310-321, DOI: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.02.006.

13
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
uncommon, and largely depend on accounting methodology, tools, and 
parameters being used.20 Such inconsistencies, together with the overall 
scarcity of data, further stress the need for accurate information gathering 
and sharing, and better communication regarding tools and best practices 
that can successfully and verifiably lead to lower carbon and other GHG 
emissions in the coffee sector.
Another element of variation in GHG accounting for coffee is that 
emissions are location-specific and highly dependent on the growing 
and processing methodologies used on-farm—which also varies across 
locations. While coffee production systems of all types contribute to 
CO2 and other GHG emissions, and, consequently, to climate change, the 
extent of their contribution ranges. Small-scale agroforestry systems, for 
example, are considered to be significantly less impactful than full-sun 
modes of cultivation and, in some cases, may even sequester more CO2eq 
than they contribute. This is especially seen when calculating emissions 
by unit of land, not by pound or kilogram of coffee (see Case Study #4 on 
page 40 for more information). Again, because of these differences—and 
units of measure applied—making generalized emission estimates across 
the coffee value chain is challenging, and findings are often inconsistent.
In addition, there is a lack of standardized data surrounding 
transportation. Not only do modes of transport vary by region, but 
reliance on such modes is prevalent and diverse for a countless number 
of activities in both producing and consuming nations—and anything 
taking place between the two. Activities that surround export—like aerial 
transport, overseas transport, and land transport from port to warehouse 
in specific locations—may have accessible records of emission (i.e., in the 
case of Costa Rican coffee traveling to the United Kingdom). However, 
other transport-related production activities—such as the transport of 
beans from farm to processing center on the back of a motorbike for 
hire—are harder to account for, especially for certain regions where there 
may be a dearth of records.21 Transport of employees to and from their 
normal places of work, meanwhile, remains highly complex to quantify 
and is consequently even excluded from some standards, like the Publicly 
Available Specification 2050 (PAS 2050), a carbon standard created by the 
British Standards Institute and the British Department for Environment, 
Food, and Rural Affairs.22
Furthermore, though many sustainability certifications, such as Fairtrade 
and Rainforest Alliance, have been adopted by coffee companies and 
coffee growers alike as part of their efforts to foster environmental—as 
well as social—accountability, none of these certifications include direct 
standards related to GHG emissions.23 Although their promotion of 
environmental conservation, erosion prevention, shade tree cover, and 
efficient use of machinery and fertilizer (to name a few) likely lead to GHG 
emission reduction, specific criteria around emissions and sequestration 
are absent.24 This constitutes a potential gap in environmental 
sustainability, and challenges companies and growers from being able to 
leverage their existing certifications to verifiably meet new legislation. 
21	 Bernard Kilian et al., “Carbon 
Footprint Across Coffee.”
22	 Bernard Kilian et al., “Carbon 
Footprint Across Coffee.”
23	 Fairtrade International has the 
Climate Standard, but this gov-
erns the sale of carbon credits 
which are certified as Fair-
trade (i.e., carbon as product). 
Throughout the rest of Fair-
trade’s product standards, while 
there are both environmental 
suggestions and requirements, 
those requirements don’t delin-
eate carbon footprint caps.
24	  Milena Segura and Hernan 
Andrade, “Carbon Footprints 
in the Coffee (Coffea Arabica 
L.) Productive Chains with Dif-
ferent Certification Standards 
in Costa Rica,” Luna Azul, 35 
(2012).
20	 Acharya and Lal, “Carbon  
Accounting for Coffee.”

14
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Several laws and regulations have been passed in both producing and 
consuming countries over the last few years, designed to tackle climate 
change and regulate GHG emissions. Among others, they include Costa 
Rica’s National Plan of Adaptation to Climate Change, Uganda’s National 
Climate Change Act 2021, Vietnam’s Green Growth Strategy for 2021-
2030, and the European Green Deal.25
In light of new legislation and ongoing impacts of climate change, there 
continues to be a pressing need to substantially support companies and 
producers to reduce their carbon footprint and report on their progress and 
emissions. Currently, a growing number of companies and organizations 
are taking steps to reduce their emissions or meet “carbon neutral” or 
“net zero” targets (two distinct terms that are often and erroneously used 
interchangeably, see the glossary for more information); the challenge 
remains choosing the most effective tools or methodologies to meet 
their goals, especially when present emission reduction strategies vary 
significantly across the value chain. It is the goal of this report to highlight 
some of these strategies and encourage more targeted conversation about 
verifiable methods and outcomes, in order to increase proven and positive 
action on climate change throughout the entire coffee sector.
25	 For more laws and regulations, 
visit Grantham Research Insti-
tute on Climate Change and 
the Environment.

Phase Two:  
Industry Research  
& Analysis 
About This Phase 
Phase two of the research project took place between October and 
December 2021 and focused on a review of coffee companies’ and sector-
specific organizations’ publicly shared sustainability claims, be they official 
reports, websites, or other outreach methods. Regardless of medium, 
their public-facing communication tended to be aimed at sharing ongoing 
efforts and current standing in regard to GHG emissions, environmental 
sustainability, and social justice actions. Notably, like other sectors, large 
companies in the coffee industry seemed to offer greater disclosure of 
verified emission rates obtained from the use of specific tools compared 
to small businesses.26 The researchers speculate this is due to the expense 
of GHG reporting and verification, and the fact that legislation or 
consumer pressure may require public disclosure for only large companies 
at present. As such, findings for this portion of the report are skewed 
toward large companies and organizations. Despite this limitation, the 
subsequent analysis of 49 publicly available disclosures regarding GHG 
emission reduction efforts and climate actions reveal a diversity of focus 
and strategies.
Key Findings
Current approaches are predominately focused on the accurate tracking 
and accounting of GHG emissions, particularly at the level of cultivation 
and production, to identify reduction targets. Two approaches appear to 
be the most common among respondents to mitigate coffee’s contribution 
to climate change: land-based carbon sequestration (returning carbon to 
the soil and keeping it there) and investments in carbon credits. 
Although curbing transportation-related GHG emissions remains a poorly 
addressed challenge (particularly in light of coffee’s travels around the 
world), one possible approach may be to replace the value chain’s use 
of fossil fuels with renewable forms of energy, though ongoing reliance 
on some forms of transportation makes a complete shift impossible. 
Solutions to address another key challenge in the widespread adoption of 
effective carbon emission reduction strategies—data sharing and accurate 
accounting—are also unclear, perhaps even more so. 
15
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
26	 Thomas Singer, “Sustainabil-
ity Disclosure Practices: 2022 
Edition,” The Conference Board.

16
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Accounting Methods
Approximately 30% of the online reports reviewed through the desk 
research phase demonstrated that many ongoing emission reduction 
efforts are focused first and foremost on gathering accurate emission 
values through available monitoring and accounting tools. Such tools rely 
on satellite imagery and artificial intelligence, among others, and are most 
often applied at the levels of cultivation and production. Indeed, tracking 
GHG emissions in these contexts is seen as a critical first step toward 
decision-making prior to building strategy and establishing investments in 
carbon emission reduction. To better coordinate tracking and baselining 
efforts, many industry actors are increasingly calling for wider and more 
consistent adoption of reliable GHG and carbon footprint accounting, 
especially at the farm level. This helps provide further input into average 
emissions throughout the sector and supports industry actors to create 
more cohesive and comprehensive strategies for emission reduction. 
The importer Cooperative Coffees, for example, is leveraging the Cool 
Farm Tool27 to measure and incentivize further carbon sequestration at 
the level of cultivation and production in collaboration with their partner 
cooperatives. In particular, they are working with industry partners to 
better adapt the Cool Farm Tool to coffee production systems, in support 
of helping other industry actors make strides toward efficient carbon 
tracking and subsequent reduction. This project (for more information, 
see Case Study #3 on page 38) builds on their existing investments in 
regenerative, organic agriculture and reforestation throughout Latin 
America. Notably, the project also builds on their efforts to support their 
roaster partners to measure their carbon footprints from shipping ports to 
point-of-sale for consumers, for which they have an in-house tool.28
Common Strategies
Carbon Sequestration 
Carbon sequestration, or returning carbon to the soil and keeping it 
there, is a valuable approach to mitigate coffee’s contribution to climate 
change. Several companies are prioritizing GHG measurement and 
emission reduction through land-based interventions, which involve 
terrestrial carbon sequestration. This is taking place in two distinct ways. 
First, through direct investment in soil carbon capture on farms within a 
company’s own value chain, and second, through reforestation and land 
conservation efforts elsewhere. These distinct strategies can also be 
understood, respectively, as examples of insetting versus offsetting. 
Via insetting, coffee companies measure the GHG emissions throughout 
their own value chain and identify investment opportunities that will lead 
to emission reduction and/or carbon sequestration. Examples of such 
27	 Editor’s Note: One member of 
the research team, The Chain 
Collaborative’s Nora Burkey, 
was a key collaborator in a 
project to adapt the Cool Farm 
Tool to coffee systems. 
28	 https://coopcoffees.coop/com-
mitting-to-net-zero-carbon-
by-2025/

17
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
investments may be supporting producers to transition to agroforestry, 
improve pruning practices, or apply fewer synthetic fertilizers. Meanwhile, 
offsetting allows companies to invest in carbon sequestration outside their 
own value chain in an effort to achieve neutrality. Investments to date 
identified through the desk research phase include support for wetland 
restoration, forest protection and preservation efforts, and afforestation 
as well as reforestation throughout Asia, Africa, and the Americas. For 
example, several companies, including Peet’s Coffee and Lavazza, have 
opted to focus in part on investing in land restoration and conservation 
efforts outside their value chain. Lavazza is supporting forest cover in Peru, 
Uruguay, and Zimbabwe, while Peet’s Coffee is sponsoring the planting 
of mangrove trees in Myanmar to offset emissions.29 The latter project is 
coordinated in partnership with Worldview International Foundation, and 
monitored by Enveritas.30 
Regardless of whether companies choose to inset or offset, the importance 
they have placed on focusing on land-based interventions and terrestrial or 
soil carbon sequestration is clear. While each company's stated motivation 
for prioritizing land-based interventions was not always clear, the authors 
note that above and below-ground carbon sequestration (in plants and 
soil, respectively) has the ability to take up atmospheric carbon through the 
photosynthetic process, and then store or “sequester” it in plant biomass 
and soil for the medium to long term. This effectively combats climate 
change and is an important focus for any company or organization working 
in the agricultural sector.
Carbon Credits 
Another common approach to reach carbon neutrality is direct investment 
in carbon credits. Carbon credits refer to certified emission reductions 
achieved through climate action projects, whereby one credit translates 
to one ton of CO2 or CO2eq sequestered. These projects and their 
resulting sequestration achievements are typically verified by third party 
organizations, which apply stringent qualifications to ensure accuracy in 
accounting. Companies and organizations purchase these credits to offset 
their own direct or indirect emissions. 
Caravela Coffee, for example, measures their emissions throughout 
their value chain using a variety of tools,31 and has offset their emissions 
through the purchase of carbon credits from Colombia-based non-profit 
Masbosques.32 This is only one part of their strategy, as the company has 
also focused on insetting, including investing in a transition to renewable 
energy at their dry mill in Colombia in 2018 (see “Transition to Renewables,” 
on page 18). This company example shows that purchasing offsets and 
participating in this part of the carbon market alongside insetting is a 
critical component to any strategy aimed at achieving carbon neutrality, 
especially considering that indirect emissions33 outside a company’s direct 
control are difficult to reduce (in particular, those related to shipping—see 
more information in “Fossil Fuel Reliance,” on page 19). 
31	 To date, they have partnered 
with One Carbon World to 
estimate emissions across 
their supply chain, from farms 
to import offices, and with 
Cool Farm Alliance to estimate 
emissions from cultivation and 
production.
29	 https://www.peets.com/pages/
carbon-neutral-series-subscrip-
tion.
30	 https://www.lavazza.com/en/
landing/capsules-zero-co2-im-
pact.html.
32	 https://www.caravela.coffee/
our-impact/
33	 These can also be understood 
as a company’s Scope 3  
emissions, as described  
by the GHGP.

18
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Beyond Caravela Coffee, another example of a company applying a similar 
approach is Zero Carbon Coffee, a roasting and retail company that has 
incorporated the purchase of carbon credits into their own strategy and 
emission reduction plans. On their website, they claim to have become “the 
first coffee brand to achieve Climate Neutral certification,” after having 
measured their emissions in 2019.34
Challenges and Opportunities
Fossil Fuel Reliance 
For the most part, ongoing carbon emission reduction strategies seem to 
overlook transportation, despite the fact that, most often, green coffee 
moves across continents, and roasted coffee across countries, to meet 
global demand. Companies claiming to have developed strategies to 
address their transportation-related emissions are presently distinguishing 
between carbon emissions that are produced from the movement of coffee 
across land and oceans (e.g., freight emissions) from emissions that are 
produced when people travel for business (e.g., plane and car travel). 
While the lack of focus on transportation may suggest that decarbonizing 
international shipping on a large scale is one of the most challenging 
aspects of emission reduction throughout the industry, opportunities 
do exist. Choosing shipping and vehicle options that boast higher fuel 
efficiency is one way to reduce emissions from freight and travel. There is 
evidence, for example, that slowing maritime shipping speeds to conserve 
fuel, utilizing kites and sails on the ocean, and making shipping freights 
use more sustainable electricity grids in ports are all viable options to 
reduce carbon emissions.35 Present disruption in global shipping as a result 
of COVID-19 and other factors may of course hinder renewed focus on 
transportation going forward, as rising costs, lack of container availability, 
and the need to find new shipping routes are the priority focal points for 
many companies as of the writing of this report. However, even as the 
industry faces ongoing logistics challenges, the focus on emission reduction 
should not be an afterthought.
Transition to Renewables
Investments in renewable energy in both majority-consuming and 
majority-producing countries are key components of several company-
wide strategies that intend to drastically reduce GHG emissions. At 
the consumer end of the value chain, some coffee corporations are 
transitioning their energy use in offices and retail spaces from non-
renewable to renewable sources of energy, such as through the installation 
of solar panels. Coca-Cola, owner of Costa Coffee, for example, operates 
select stores that boast solar panels, and are strategically positioned to 
reduce energy consumption. Notably, while not an example of renewable 
34	 https://www.zerocarboncoffee.
com/
35	  https://www.imo.org.

19
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
energy, the stores also focus on sustainable sourcing of certain materials, 
such as Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) timber.36 This demonstrates 
the important intersection between improved sourcing and GHG emission 
reduction in strategy development.37 
Beyond the introduction of solar power, other common office- and retail-
associated actions include the introduction of energy-efficient LED lighting 
systems and the installation of charging ports for electric vehicles. The 
latter is also seen as a measure that encourages employees to reduce 
their own carbon footprint. On the producing end of the value chain, 
renewable energy has also been prioritized. For example, as previously 
noted, the company Caravela Coffee transitioned their dry mill in Colombia 
to solar power, and the panels are now said to provide approximately 
81,621 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per year. The examples from both Coca-Cola 
and Caravela highlight a trend that emerged through the desk research, 
specifically that solar power appears to be the most widely adopted form 
of renewable energy for coffee actors to reduce their direct emissions and 
to replace fossil fuel-based sources of energy. Keurig Dr. Pepper is unique in 
their renewable energy investments in that the company opted for carbon 
offsetting via wind farms.38 An initial purchase of carbon offsets from the 
Kansas Greensburg Wind Farm in 2009 later led the company to sign a 
multi-year contract in 2010, whereby they agreed to buy 50% of the farm’s 
offsets for a duration of three years.39 In 2019, the company announced 
their new “Drink Well. Do Good.” corporate responsibility platform, which 
outlines multi-year goals related to the environment, health, supply chains, 
and community well-being. The platform includes plans to reduce fleet 
emissions and to obtain 100% of their electricity from renewable sources 
by 2025.40
Data Sharing and Accurate Accounting 
Data sharing and accurate accounting remain key issues for the 
widespread adoption of effective carbon emission reduction strategies. A 
combined lack of peer-reviewed publications and publicly shared company 
data pertaining to emission rates of coffee enterprises creates difficulty in 
properly identifying emission hotspots across the value chain. While some 
retailers, traders, and roasters are working to publicly provide meaningful 
data about their GHG emissions and efforts to reduce these emissions, 
it is clear they frequently rely on different accounting methodologies 
and systems. This lack of consistency in data collection approach and 
methodology challenges actors across the supply chain from being able 
to comprehensively reduce their GHG emissions and compare footprint 
data and reduction targets. Furthermore, because the coffee industry is 
both international and segmented, an ongoing lack of consistent reporting 
methodologies will hinder successful collaboration and collective action 
going forward. 
While each coffee stakeholder is in a unique position—depending on their 
distinct role in the market and supply chain—to develop and apply GHG 
38	 It is important to clarify that 
this decision was made in 2010 
by Green Mountain Coffee 
Roasters, which was renamed 
Keurig Green Mountain in 2014, 
and later merged with Dr. Pep-
per Snapple Group in 2018, to 
become Keurig Dr. Pepper.
39	 Green Mountain Coffee Roast-
ers, Inc., “Corporate Social Re-
sponsibility Report Fiscal 2011,”.
40	 https://investors.keurigdrpep-
per.com/annual-reports.
37	 Though rarely noted in the 
reviewed reports, the promotion 
of recycling or the use of more 
sustainable/upcycled materials 
is another important intersec-
tion to consider. It was beyond 
the scope of this project to 
understand why these strate-
gies were less often mentioned 
in reports or even academic 
articles about GHG emission 
reduction, though the relevance 
of the intersection is worth 
mentioning here.
36	 https://www.costa.co.uk/sus-
tainability/climate.

20
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
reduction strategies, information sharing is critical to scale net-zero 
solutions or carbon neutrality, as is the availability of verifiable accounting 
methodologies.

Phase Three:  
Survey Findings 
About This Phase 
Phases three and four of this research project were conducted 
simultaneously and focused on understanding the experience of many 
actors within the coffee industry and their efforts to reduce their GHG 
emissions. Such feedback was especially useful, as many of the public-
facing reports reviewed were published several years ago, and referenced 
claims dating back over a decade. While this is typical in carbon reporting, 
as assessing a company’s carbon footprint is an onerous task and therefore 
takes place infrequently, it doesn’t provide clear guidance on current 
activities, especially for such an ever-adapting element of sustainability 
efforts. In total, 22 respondents completed the survey, representing 
traders, roasters, public sector organizations, civil society/non-profit 
organizations, advocacy organizations, and research institutions. These 
companies and organizations operate throughout the globe.  
Key Findings 
For survey respondents, GHG emission reduction is seen to be critically 
important, with many articulating a need for farm-level baselines 
before developing a strategy to achieve reductions. Notably, land-based 
interventions remain a primary focus of the actors surveyed, regardless of 
which tools and approaches they employ or what role they occupy in the 
value chain. 
Generally, there was a lack of clarity about what actions will have the 
most impact—and which actions will allow stakeholders to meet their 
reduction targets. Although the use of carbon credits to offset emissions 
is an available opportunity when insetting targets are not met, offsetting 
appeared to be a less popular approach to reducing emissions among 
respondents. All respondents identified that limited knowledge, finance, 
and collaboration throughout the value chain are key barriers to the sector-
wide scaling of efforts to reduce emissions.
21
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain

22
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Industry Perspectives
A Critically Important Issue 
A significant majority of respondents, 77% in total, claimed that their 
company or organization is currently involved in activities and actions to 
reduce their overall carbon footprint or the carbon footprint of others, 
such as farmers in their supply chain. Unanimously, the main motivation 
behind engaging in these initiatives was the perceived need to ensure that 
global coffee production is preserved and maintained in the long-term, 
in cooperation with global partners. Notably, several respondents also 
commented that emission reduction is “the right thing to do,” though this 
statement was not further elaborated. 
In general, all respondents believed that achieving significant GHG 
emission reduction within the coffee value chain in the next few years 
was either important (27%) or very important (73%). In alignment with 
the findings from the desk review, a key first step before taking further 
action was the use of GHG accounting tools, especially at the farm level, 
to establish baselines and strategies. Among the respondents, one said, 
“We are currently investing in the capacity of coffee enterprises at origin 
to measure their carbon footprint; [the] next step will be determining 
reduction options.” Meanwhile, others indicated that the lack of accessible 
carbon accounting tools, measurement frameworks, and data collection 
methodologies were challenges to setting goals to achieve meaningful 
improvements.
Preference for Land-Based Approaches  
Respondents agreed that leveraging GHG accounting tools to establish 
baselines and meet future targets is important. Further data from the 
survey demonstrated that many actors are indeed taking steps to meet 
this goal, with 13 of 22 respondents (59%) stating that they apply some 
form of technology or digital tool to support their accounting. Given the 
particular interest in farm-level baselines, it is not surprising to see many 
companies are already using farm-related accounting systems, such as 
the Cool Farm Tool (67% of respondents claimed to be using this), remote 
sensing technologies, and/or other in-house designs.41 
Regardless of the tools used, respondents noted that their company or 
organization was largely focused on (or interested in) GHG emission 
reduction via land-based and/or production-related interventions. In 
total, only 20% of the respondents claimed to have no emission reduction 
strategy at the level of cultivation or production, but these respondents 
were not as directly involved in farm-level or production work. 
41	  The Cool Farm Tool, which bills 
itself as an “online greenhouse 
gas, water, and biodiversity 
calculator for farming,” has a 
perennials module which can 
be applied on coffee plots. The 
tool estimates emissions and 
sequestration levels per plot, 
based on land users’ cultiva-
tion and production activities. 
Remote sensing, meanwhile, 
refers to satellite, drone, or 
aircraft technology that scans 
the above-ground biomass of 
specific properties to estimate 
that land’s carbon emission and 
sequestration.

23
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Among the respondents claiming to have farm- and production-level 
emission reduction strategies in place, efforts were focused primarily 
on the following: 1) reforestation and land conservation, including 
agroforestry; 2) improvements to wastewater management; 3) reduction 
or elimination of the use of certain fertilizers and pesticides; and 4) 
investments in solar and other renewable forms of energy (see Figure 2).42 
Of note, many respondents explained that their initiatives were in the very 
early stages of development. To move forward, they suggested it would be 
important to, first, better involve smallholder farmers in their efforts, and 
second, collaborate with cooperatives, civil society organizations, and other 
supply chain actors to reach scale.
Figure 2. Self-reported actions and initiatives aimed at reducing GHG emissions at the  
levels of cultivation and production (respondents were allowed multiple answers)
 
Reforestation and land conservation
Agroforestry and improved land management
Reduced use of synthetic fertilizers
Reduced use of pesticides
Improvement of wasterwater treatments
Fuel efficient processing faciliites
No current investment
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
42	  Once again, efforts highlighting 
on-farm recycling or upcycling 
were notably absent from 
the responses. It was unclear 
whether this was not a key 
focus of various actors, one 
not often associated with GHG 
emission reduction strategies, 
or other. 
60%
60%
60%
50%
35%
15%
20%

24
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Challenges Ahead 
Lack of Clarity: Impact and Reduction 
While emphasis is placed mostly on interventions at the levels of cultivation 
and production, according to the survey, respondents believe that the most 
demonstrable GHG emission reduction achievements have been associated 
with land conservation approaches and the adoption of energy-efficient or 
other footprint-reducing strategies in corporate offices and retail locations 
(see Figure 3). Such responses may reflect the fact that roasters made up 
45% of survey respondents, and actors are more likely to understand their 
progress in areas over which they have more control and for which they 
maintain more accurate reporting. Indeed, energy efficiency would relate to 
Scopes 1 and 2, and often, energy use is reported separately alongside carbon 
footprints given specific clarity around what the data is able to show. For 
example, isolating energy-related data allows actors to demonstrate their 
decreased reliance on energy, even if such a dip in reliance does not have a 
major impact on their overall carbon footprint when accounting for all scopes. 
Regardless of which interventions have the greatest impact, real or perceived, 
the majority of survey respondents also claimed that their company or 
organization has either not achieved their emission reduction targets (45%) 
or that they are unsure about their progress (27%). This is further indication 
that accurate and standardized methodologies to evaluate and reduce GHG 
emissions need to become more accessible if companies and organizations 
are to meet their goals in verifiable ways.
Figure 3. Actions and practices which have provided the greatest results  
(respondents were allowed multiple answers)
Land or soil carbon
Transportation
Roasting
Packaging
Retail
Corporate office
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
33.33%
33.33%
50%
16.67%
16.67%
16.67%

25
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Underutilization of Offsetting  
Although the desk research phase of this project revealed the significance 
and relevance of purchasing carbon credits (i.e., offsetting, when reduction 
and insetting are not possible), such expenditures did not appear 
widespread among the survey respondents. Only one-third of respondents 
said that carbon credit purchases were part of their strategies. 
While the survey did not ask whether and why the focus on carbon 
credits has declined or increased over the years, it did ask respondents 
to describe which activities these credits tended to reference. Primarily, 
survey respondents claimed their companies and organizations focused on 
credits that related to CO2eq capture from land restoration efforts, clean 
energy, and other community-based projects (see Figure 4). The reasons 
for these focuses were not thoroughly provided, but when asked about 
where the greatest potential for carbon offset exists when considering 
the entire coffee value chain, 80% of the respondents pointed to land and 
terrestrial carbon sequestration. The adoption of clean energy in retail 
spaces and corporate offices, as well as the reduction in emissions from 
transportation, came second. Notably, reference to “waste to energy” 
solutions were absent, potentially corroborating a lack of focus from the 
coffee and carbon industries on recycling and related activities.
Figure 4. Offset areas that companies are investing in through the purchase of carbon credits 
(respondents were allowed multiple answers)
Land or soil 
conservation
Renewable or
clean energy
Nitrous oxide 
abatement
Community projects
Waste solutions
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
28.57%
85.71%
42.86%

26
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Significant Gaps
In consideration of the challenges that the entire coffee value chain 
experiences as it relates to GHG emission reduction, respondents pointed 
to limited knowledge or access to information, and a lack of incentives 
to make operational changes, as the two most predominant challenges. 
Lack of financing to invest in solutions and a lack of collaboration in the 
value stream were noted as secondary challenges (see Figure 5). As one 
respondent said, “Emissions assessments are time-consuming and costly. It 
can seem impossible [to achieve] and few businesses know where to begin.”
Figure 5. Perceived challenges for the industry when trying to engage in effective emission reduction 
strategies (respondents were allowed multiple answers)
Lack of incentives, 
financial or otherwise
Limited knowledge or 
access to information
Lack of financing to 
invest in solutions
Lack of collaboration
in the value stream
There are no 
challenges
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
80.95%
80.95%
57.14%
52.38%

Phase Four:  
Interview Findings 
About This Phase 
Simultaneous to the third phase of this research project, phase four 
consisted of nine targeted interviews with select coffee traders, roasters, 
and retailers as well as with several environmentally focused non-
governmental organizations. The interviews were conducted with the 
environmental sustainability managers, climate specialists or team leads, 
and/or CEOs of these participating companies and organizations. The goal 
of the interviews was to complement the desk and quantitative research 
on carbon emission reduction trends and gaps throughout the industry, 
and to add qualitative insight. 
The companies and organizations interviewed shared the following 
characteristics: they operated globally and were relatively large in scale. 
The reasons for this selection were two-fold. First, the researchers wanted 
to interview companies and organizations that were of a similar size 
and scope to those reviewed during phase two, and second, we aimed to 
understand how coffee sector actors were currently accounting for GHG 
emissions across the entire value chain. While producer organizations and 
small companies do engage in robust emission reduction, findings from the 
desk review phase suggested that the former focus their efforts almost 
exclusively at the levels of cultivation and production, while the latter face 
greater logistical and financial challenges in verifying their accounting and 
reporting when compared to large companies. 
Key Findings 
Like the survey respondents, interviewees identified that the existing 
lack of standardization has led to limited important baseline data, 
benchmarking, and comparative analysis. Although the interviewees are 
interested in focusing on emission hotspots, the lack of standardization 
also means they struggle to accurately quantify their Scope 3 emissions. 
Critically, interviewees identified the relationship between industry/
consumer demand for GHG reduction, and related financing for farmers  
to meet these demands. Specifically, without targeted financing, the 
gap between these demands and famers’ capacity to meet them will 
remain. One approach—which is of increasing interest to many coffee 
industry actors—is payment to farmers for ecosystem services, such as  
carbon sequestration. 
27
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain

28
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Existing Challenges 
Lack of Standardization Leads to Further Issues 
Similar to phase three findings, the majority of interview respondents, 
both organizations and companies, noted that the lack of standardized 
methodologies in assessing GHG emissions across the value chain poses 
a significant challenge to setting and meeting reduction targets in a 
timely fashion. 
First, without standardized methodologies, there is a lack of widely agreed-
upon benchmarks or baselines from which to improve. Respondents noted 
that understanding their company’s baseline of GHG emissions is critical 
before any actionable strategy aimed at reducing those emissions can be 
put into place. Even the companies that have begun to account for their 
GHG emissions lament the lack of standardization, as it was suggested 
that this leads to diverse means of accounting and effectively makes 
company-to-company data incomparable. Many respondents voiced 
concerns regarding the risks of comparing climate work or percentages of 
GHG emissions from company to company without additional contextual 
analysis related to accounting tools, boundaries, and models.
Difficulty of Quantifying Scope 3 Emissions 
Company interview respondents appeared to be deeply invested in 
measuring their carbon footprint and in locating carbon emission hotspots 
within their operations. Reliance on the GHGP was widespread among the 
companies interviewed. While respondents noted that direct emissions 
under Scope 1 of the GHGP, and indirect emissions related to energy use 
as defined in Scope 2, are relatively easy to account for—as they fall under 
a company’s control—it was acknowledged that Scope 3 accounting was 
particularly challenging. For roasters and traders alike, Scope 3 emissions 
frequently constitute, among other categories, those at the level of 
cultivation and production. As previously noted, accurate and standardized 
accounting at these levels is lacking, making Scope 3-related GHG 
emissions difficult to comprehensively quantify and therefore reduce.43 
Despite the difficulty, many respondents considered Scope 3 accounting 
especially important and useful for companies to assess should they want 
to make meaningful claims regarding emission reduction in the future–given 
the total percentage of GHG emissions that can be categorized under this 
scope. To put this into context, a couple of company respondents suggested 
that up to 85% or 90% of their emissions are classified as Scope 3.
43	 While the standardization of 
accounting methodologies 
remains a work in progress at 
the levels of cultivation and 
production, interview respond-
ents expressed the importance 
of continuing to incentivize and 
support farmers to implement 
agroforestry and diversification 
efforts now. Indeed, though 
the tools to accurately and 
exactly quantify the emission 
reduction that results from 
the application of these best 
agricultural practices are still 
in development, the benefits of 
the practices are well-known 
for both CO2eq reduction and 
productivity increase.

29
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Looking Ahead  
A Need for Targeted Financing 
When asked to elaborate on their emission reduction strategies and use 
of carbon footprint accounting tools, several interviewees noted first and 
foremost the importance of building strategies—and confirming tools for 
use—that are based on the educational and financial realities and needs of 
suppliers. Smallholder farmers constitute the majority of coffee producers 
and suppliers, and as a result of many factors, they have limited financial 
capacity to apply ongoing sustainable farming practices that would lead to 
emission reduction or carbon sequestration on their farms and beyond. 
One interviewee, for example, stated that their company’s interest 
was to focus on the financial well-being of smallholder coffee growers 
alongside any and all of their environmental efforts. They saw this as 
essential and suggested that some demands and calls for environmental 
protection—especially from the consuming side of the value chain—neglect 
to understand the social and economic consequences of climate change, 
and/or the social and economic implications of solutions. It was noted 
that environmentally focused programs must also therefore adequately 
ensure the simultaneous socio-economic stability of farmers if they are to 
be successful. This includes ensuring that climate solutions at the level of 
cultivation and production are accompanied by proper technical support 
and living income guarantees. Without such efforts, interviewees agreed 
that coffee farmers would not have the necessary capacity or external 
financial incentives to invest in long-term climate solutions. 
In addition, respondents noted that access to GHG emission assessment 
tools needs to be expanded for farmers in order for them to estimate and 
improve—in collaboration with other industry actors—the environmental 
impact of their current agricultural practices.
Payment for Ecosystem Services  
At present, certifications like Rainforest Alliance, Fairtrade International, 
Organic, and CAFE Practices do not require GHG accounting and 
reporting, nor do they mandate carbon neutrality, net zero goals, or 
specific rates of emissions or sequestration. However, many industry actors 
are demonstrating interest in providing voluntary (i.e., non-certification-
related) payment for ecosystem services as an alternative income source 
for farmers and contribution to living income. Examples of ecosystem 
services, defined as benefits that humans receive thanks to natural 
environments, include clean water (via treatment facilities and conserved 
forests) as well as food provision and soil health (through biodiversity 
and carbon sequestration). Of note, while agriculture contributes to GHG 
emissions, the extent of this contribution depends on farming system, 

30
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
and, through improved practices, emissions can be offset—constituting an 
ecosystem service.
It is clear that soil carbon storage counts as an ecosystem service. 
Companies predict that if they can pay farmers for their carbon 
sequestration, they will both reward farmers for their climate-smart 
best agricultural practices and establish an additional way to drive more 
funding to producers. As most interviewees mentioned the need to better 
assist or incentivize farmers in applying more sustainable or carbon-
smart farming practices, payment for services is viewed as a way to fill 
the incentive gap. Such payment can also set companies apart from their 
competitors, and may rapidly become a key element of marketing schemes 
going forward.

Conclusion: 
Recommendations  
and Case Studies
While the desk research as well as the 
survey and interview findings from this 
project pointed to the many challenges 
inherent to GHG accounting and reduction 
in agriculture, study respondents and 
experts alike agree that engaging in 
carbon emission reduction is a non-
negotiable requirement for the coffee 
industry going forward. Without it, future 
production cannot be guaranteed. 
This paper intended to shed light on the efforts currently underway in the 
coffee industry to a) quantify and reduce GHG emissions throughout the 
value chain; b) meet sustainability and emission reduction targets; and 
c) keep farmer livelihoods at the center of the conversation. The research 
team hoped that, through a combination of desk research, surveys, and 
interviews, it would be possible to identify key focal points and gaps in the 
industry’s understanding of carbon and identify best practices currently 
in use. As the strategies reviewed throughout the research process were 
employed by actors of all different shapes and sizes, it was also our hope 
to provide practical recommendations for all coffee businesses interested 
in reducing their own emissions.
While these aims were partially met, the research revealed that gaps in 
knowledge and action do still remain, both within the literature and among 
coffee industry actors. These gaps relate to larger, cross-sector challenges 
which limit collective understanding and the standardization and adoption 
of more emission reduction techniques and reporting worldwide. Though 
there is an important amount of work and investment taking place to curb 
GHG emissions, the coffee industry is just beginning to understand its 
capacity to mitigate climate change through carbon-based efforts, both 
inside and outside of the carbon market. The fact that gaps do remain 
does not diminish the importance of the efforts currently underway, nor 
the preliminary findings in this report. 
31
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain

32
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Finally, for the industry to continue to make progress in measuring and 
reducing GHG emissions, as well as in sequestering carbon (and valuing 
sequestration), coffee industry actors will need to work collectively as 
well as individually. As companies seek to measure and mitigate their 
footprints, they should also share their practices and work with their peers 
to develop a common understanding of how to measure GHG emissions in 
the coffee value chain, and discuss what kind of mitigation strategies are 
most effective. Meanwhile, coffee farmers share an inherent vulnerability 
to climate change, but their needs and abilities to adapt and to engage in 
GHG emission reduction differ depending on numerous factors, from farm 
size to farming system to resource access. While it is clear that progress 
will continue, we hope that by clarifying points of common confusion and 
offering case studies on work being done to date, we can help to accelerate 
the pace of progress through this report. 

33
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Recommendations 
In light of the report’s findings, the following recommendations are offered. 
Of note, many are broad and require a forward-looking and collaborative 
mindset rather than a strict focus on perfecting best practice. They also 
require partnership outside of the coffee sector, as a number of carbon-
related strategies are currently being tested for scale across regions, 
products, and contexts. As the carbon market itself is an ever-changing 
commodity market that will change and adapt over time, just as the coffee 
market itself will do, it is important that all industry actors keep abreast of 
alterations and reorientations. 
Invest in the development of shared and universally-accepted GHG tracking 
and accounting systems for the coffee industry, ensuring their adaptability to 
various contexts.
Share GHG tracking and accounting systems throughout the coffee industry 
to a) allow for comparability; b) demonstrate best practice for policymaking; 
and c) support the development of company-wide or organizational reduction 
strategies.
Rely on existing tools and models to establish baselines for GHG emission 
within companies or organizations to develop future targets and a clear 
roadmap for carbon footprint reduction, insetting, and offsetting.
Consider investing in carbon credits to meet carbon neutral targets while 
also working substantially to reduce emissions among all three scopes—this 
includes insetting within one’s own supply chain.
Champion research and pilot projects focused on improving emission 
reduction strategies related to all types of transportation.
Improve awareness among a diversity of actors about the distinctions 
between Scopes 1-3, their related accounting methodologies to date, and 
their suggested strategies for reduction.
Maintain focus on renewable energy at all levels of the value chain, and consider 
further conversation about the role of sustainable materials and upcycling.
Directly invest in the capacity of producers and producer organizations to 
measure and reduce their carbon footprint over time, ensuring they maintain 
ownership over the process in the long-term.
Ensure that producers are continually incentivized to take action toward 
carbon and other emission reduction by maintaining focus on living income, 
supply chain profitability, and on-farm productivity.
Prioritize information sharing and pre-competitive collaboration in all 
activities and efforts related to the above.

34
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Case Studies
San Francisco Bay Coffee 
San Francisco Bay Coffee, a family-owned roasting company founded 
in 1979, understands the importance of continuing to assess their GHG 
emissions and to keep track of their achievements. As their company 
evolves, so do their carbon emission reduction targets. They have noted 
that reliance on carbon and GHG accounting tools is critical to identifying 
emission hotspots and to developing emission reduction targets. 
Q U I C K  F A C T S
•
First carbon footprint assessment: 2007
•
Next carbon footprint assessment: 2022
•
Goal: Becoming a Carbon Neutral or Carbon Negative Company
•
Certification sought through Enveritas and UL (Underwriters
Laboratories) Solutions Zero Waste
S P E C I F I C  E F F O R T S  
Farm Level
San Francisco Bay Coffee is vertically integrated, and owns approximately 
2,800 acres in Hawaii (Kona), Mexico, and Panama. There, they experiment 
with coffee varieties and assess the on-farm potential for carbon 
sequestration and the activities that will lead to resilience to climate 
change. The company is in the process of certifying their acreage as 
carbon sequestering sites to help offset the overall CO2 that will always 
be produced as a result of their business. One example of such an effort 
aimed at reducing CO2eq output is a more targeted fertilization regime 
that reduces the reliance on tractors and minimizes fertilizer use. 
At the Roasting Facility
San Francisco Bay Coffee is currently researching electric roasting to 
reduce the amount of natural gas burned at their facilities during the 
coffee roasting process. Roasting is the company’s main activity and, 
based on their 2007 carbon footprint assessment, accounts for 42% of 
their overall carbon emissions. Since becoming aware of this figure, they 
have invested in an afterburner to reduce the amount of impurities emitted 
into the atmosphere. They have also invested in ways to make their 
roasting machines more efficient through a gas delivery system, which 
saves approximately 30% of natural gas. 

35
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Travel 
Travel policies have been put in place by the company to reduce travel 
that is not completely necessary. San Francisco Bay Coffee has also 
implemented more peer-to-peer networking tools like ZOOM and 
Microsoft Teams to ensure remote conversation and collaboration, 
alleviating the need for travel for in-person meetings. It is now in their 
strategic plan to install electric car charging ports to entice employees to 
switch to electric vehicles.
Corporate Building
The company has already replaced all of their incandescent bulbs with 
LED lights to reduce electricity usage. There is also a 1000 kW system 
of 4008 solar panels on the roof of their headquarters, which supplies 
approximately 60% of the company’s electrical needs. Currently, San 
Francisco Bay Coffee is looking into installing more panels and battery 
storage so that there is no need to send the power to and from the grid 
before use.
Waste Generation
San Francisco Bay Coffee is Zero Waste certified by Underwriter Labs at 
94% diversion from landfill. This means that 94% of all their waste is either 
composted, recycled, or reused. Of note, the company does not incinerate 
anything, though some Zero Waste programs do allow for this. In 2016, 
the company went from 500 tons of waste going to landfills (80% of 
their total waste) to approximately 30 tons in 2021 (just 6% of their total 
waste). This effort took multiple years of work, collaboration with suppliers 
to change or reduce their packaging materials, and updates to the material 
used in their factories. Now, they have set new goals to reduce waste even 
further, an additional 1% reduction per year. While the company hasn’t 
translated these values into CO2eq, it is well documented that diversion 
from landfill leads to emission reduction.
Packaging
Making all of San Francisco Bay Coffee’s packaging compostable is a 
major present focus for the Research and Development (R&D) department, 
and for the company as a whole. They are currently in the final stages of 
ensuring the material which makes up the bags of coffee that consumers 
purchase are in a home compostable state. Their “OneCUPs” are already 
industrial compostable, and they are very close to making these items 
home compostable as well.

36
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Acorn/Rabobank
Rabobank is a cooperative bank and financial services provider that 
focuses their global efforts on the food and agriculture industries. Acorn 
is the bank’s response to climate change and promotes agroforestry 
in the coffee sector and beyond. By measuring yearly above-ground 
carbon sequestration on coffee plots via scalable, low-cost, remote 
sensing technology, Acorn is able to verify and certify carbon removals 
(i.e., sequestration) from tree cover through a third-party auditor. The 
carbon-smart farming practices that are behind these carbon removals 
have recently been generating high quality credits in the voluntary 
carbon market (VCM),44 thanks to Acorn’s innovative remote sensing and 
certification solutions.
Q U I C K  F A C T S
•	
Credits sold at €20 per ton CO2eq through the VCM since 2020
•	
System relies on accounting structures approved by the VCM 
•	
The system’s measurement, reporting, and validating (MRV) service 
is a fraction of the MRV costs when verification is done by traders 
themselves (€50+ per yearly visit to a farm vs. €20,000 to certify a 
company project individually)
S P E C I F I C  E F F O R T S
Confirmation and Payment for Carbon Removal Units
Acorn connects smallholder farmers to large corporations who want to 
offset their emissions. Participating companies get highly detailed data 
on the carbon removal rates and practices of participating farmers, and 
the farmers do not have to invest onerous amounts of money on MRV. 
For the past two years, the carbon removal units (CRUs) that have been 
verified through Acorn have been selling at a minimum value of €20 per ton 
of CO2eq on the VCM. Of this €20 per ton, 80% goes to the participating 
farmer, 10% to the local implementing partner (e.g., an organization, 
company or farmer association that supports data collection), and 10% to 
Acorn for management purposes.45
Encouraging Annual Accounting and Trader Payment for Farmers’  
Eco-System Services 
Taking the yearly VCM carbon price as a benchmark value for Scope 3 
removals going forward, Acorn now aims to help more coffee traders 
account for removals in their annual reporting and compensate farmers in 
their supply chain for their successful carbon farming practices year over 
year. This is possible because carbon is gradually sequestered by coffee 
farmers as their shade and other trees grow. If such growth is effectively 
measured, farmers can get paid through Acorn each year for the additional 
growth of their trees. Since implementing above-ground carbon-smart 
45	 The 10% to Acorn covers the 
following: remote sensing of 
the sequestered carbon, third 
party verification of the CRUs, 
certification of the CRUs, selling 
the CRUs to buyers, the saving 
of data on Acorn’s registry, 
overhead, and profit for scale.
44	 The Voluntary Carbon Market 
(VCM) functions separately 
from the mandatory market. 
The mandatory market arose to 
support companies and govern-
ments as they met legal offset 
requirements prescribed by the 
Kyoto Protocol. The VCM allows 
companies to purchase verified 
carbon offsets on a voluntary 
basis (i.e., they are not legally 
required to do so). The manda-
tory carbon market, meanwhile, 
is regulated by internationally, 
regionally, and nationally recog-
nized compliance schemes, such 
as the first-of-its-kind Clean 
Development Mechanism, the 
California Carbon Market, and 
the European Emissions Trading 
Scheme (EU-ETS).

37
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
farming practices requires continuous labor and additional costs, these 
yearly payments are key to ensuring full support for farmers as they 
maintain ongoing carbon sequestration. In addition, by contributing to 
carbon-smart farming systems with traceable payment, traders can claim 
a causal relationship to the carbon removal of their suppliers.
Allowing for Transparency and Data Sharing Among Traders 
Through Acorn, farmers and traders follow the same accounting structures 
as the VCM and the mandatory market/national compliance schemes. This 
provides a solid structure for both accounting and monetizing removals, 
and it allows traders to compare their carbon removal efforts against 
other claims. In particular, companies making claims from the same supply 
streams can compare their data in order to avoid double claiming, which 
provides an additional element of verification and quality control. Likewise, 
sharing practical commitments and achievements illustrates the success of 
sustainability efforts throughout the supply chain, and can support others 
to set their own targets for tracking and increasing land-based carbon 
sequestration.
Investing in Transitions to Carbon-Farming 
In cases where farmers are already sequestering carbon, they can be paid 
in cash for their removals. In cases where farmers are looking to make a 
transition to carbon-smart farming in order to receive payments for their 
eco-system services in the future, traders may invest in this transition. The 
investment can then be repaid once the farmer is able to receive cash for 
carbon removals on their land (i.e., once they are able to sell CRUs as an 
additional product/form of income, separate from coffee). This means that 
traders do not have to compensate for their investments through cost-
cutting elsewhere or by lowering the price they pay for coffee. Furthermore, 
because Acorn’s MRV service is a fraction of the MRV costs should traders 
attempt to verify carbon capture themselves, more money can be invested 
in farming practices themselves or in supporting supply chain partners to 
achieve greater sequestration. Acorn’s MRV is also of high quality, allowing 
for greater consumer trust in claims made by traders.

38
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Cooperative Coffees
Cooperative Coffees is an importing cooperative of Fair Trade and Organic 
coffee committed to improving the livelihood of small-scale coffee farmers, 
providing services to their 23 roaster members, and creating connections 
that have a regenerative and sustainable impact. They prioritize long-
term relationships with farmer cooperatives and believe that coffee can 
contribute significantly to climate mitigation. For Cooperative Coffees, 
this means investing in the capacity of small-scale producers to regenerate 
soils, promote organic practices, and diversify their farms—among other 
efforts. It also means making sure roasters are doing their part.
Q U I C K  F A C T S
•	
Impact fund created: 2015
•	
Roasters’ contribution: US$0.03/lb. of green coffee purchased
•	
Investments to date: US$900,000 (much of this going to climate 
work at the producer level)
•	
First carbon footprint assessment of roaster members: 2017
•	
Goal: Carbon neutrality by 2025
S P E C I F I C  E F F O R T S
Impact Fund  
The Impact Fund supports carbon sequestering agricultural practices as 
well as other innovative projects in producer communities. It contributes 
to the health of people and soils and to producer-led sustainable 
development. In response to the COVID-19 emergency, for example, the 
Cooperative Coffees Board of Directors approved an emergency allocation 
of US$130,000 to support producer partners’ response to food scarcity 
and basic hygiene needs. Currently, up to 60% of Impact Fund resources 
are allocated to provide voluntary premiums to farmers for their soil carbon 
sequestration. The remainder continues to fund producer-led projects, 
many of which include reforestation and other climate-positive initiatives.
Measuring the Carbon Footprint of Roaster Members  
Cooperative Coffees continues to adapt and improve a Carbon Calculator 
to account for roaster emissions based on the most relevant data 
available. Emission categories include coffee importation from port-
to-port, with a focus on travel, storage, and warehousing; staff travel 
to and from work; inbound and outbound shipping of coffee from port 
to consumer, including emissions from warehousing; facility emissions 
from manufacturing, roasting, and packaging; air travel for business; 
and company-owned vehicle emissions. Notably, roasters can customize 
their answers in many categories; for example, they may choose their 
actual energy provider and calculate emissions based on data from the 
specific utility company in their area. The tool also allows roasters to enter 

39
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
importation data for purchases from other traders to understand their total 
carbon footprint.
Cool Farm Tool Project  
In 2020, Cooperative Coffees launched a three-year project with Root 
Capital, Sustainable Food Lab, The Chain Collaborative, and producer 
cooperatives CENFROCAFE, CAC Pangoa, COMSA, Manos Campesinas, 
Norandino, and Sol & Cafe. Funded by the InterAmerican Development 
Bank, the project seeks to adapt and customize the existing perennials 
module of the Cool Farm Tool to smallholder coffee farms. To date, over 
250 farmers across Peru, Guatemala, and Honduras have applied the tool 
to measure the carbon capture and emission of their plots and production, 
and have supported project team members to update question and 
answer fields so that they are more responsive to coffee systems. Results 
demonstrate that small-scale, organic coffee production, when managed as 
an agroforestry system and under the best agro-ecological practices, is able 
to sequester carbon and provide related ecosystem services. Through this 
project, Cooperative Coffees plans to support the scaled use of the adapted 
perennials module of the Cool Farm Tool. Ultimately, this should lead to 
greater benefits for coffee farmers by enabling producers and cooperatives 
to demonstrate verified environmental services at the negotiation table 
with all their customers throughout the industry.
Recognizing Carbon Capture in Coffee Contracts
The goals of the above project and tracking carbon sequestration on 
individual farmer plots using the Cool Farm Tool are manifold. First, 
Cooperative Coffees and their project partners aim to showcase a set of 
regenerative practices that are at once most effective for carbon capture and 
also lead to increased farm health and crop productivity. Second, they aim to 
support farmers and cooperatives in being able to identify opportunities for 
improvement in the application of best agro-ecological practices. Third, they 
plan to assess sequestration rates and establish a model for environmental 
service premiums built into coffee trade contracts to pay farmers for their 
carbon storage. Through this effort, they hope to inspire others to track 
their carbon footprint from seed-to-cup and compensate farmers for their 
regenerative practices already in place, while also providing data that will 
enable increased carbon sequestration over time.

40
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Solidaridad
Solidaridad is a non-governmental organization that has been working 
since its foundation in the 1980s with the coffee sector when it co-initiated 
the first voluntary standards for sustainability: first, Max Haavelar, and 
second, Utz certified (now merged with Rainforest Alliance). Since then, 
Solidaridad has continued to work on key sustainability issues for the 
coffee value chain, generating relevant knowledge and testing innovative 
solutions, such as “Low-Carbon Agriculture.” The organization believes the 
key to their success, in this solution and others, is working with producers 
in the field via local staff of producer organizations and buyers, who are 
deeply rooted in the communities they serve. This model generates a better 
understanding of projects and guarantees quality and local ownership of 
program activities, including Solidaridad’s technical assistance services.
Q U I C K  F A C T S
As a result of the scale of Solidaridad’s Low-Carbon Agriculture (hereafter, 
LC-Ag46) program, which was first designed in 2013, the organization has 
achieved the following results. These figures include data from coffee 
farmers who have participated in the LC-Ag program, though the program 
also works with the following value chains: cocoa, tea, yerba mate, and 
livestock.
•	
Emissions per hectare reduced by 2,463 kgs of CO2eq (44% emission 
reduction) and by 2.9 kgs of CO2eq per kg of coffee (49% emission 
reduction) on average
•	
Producers increased income by 70% and productivity by 10% on 
average with the implementation of LC-Ag practices
•	
52,446 hectares transformed into Low-Carbon Agriculture
•	
14,821 producers adopting LC-Ag practices
•	
5,213 hectares of deforestation avoided
•	
2,257,151 metric tons of CO2eq emissions avoided
•	
49,541 metric tons of CO2eq sequestered 
S P E C I F I C  E F F O R T S
Technical Assistance for Low-Carbon Agriculture
Since 2013, Solidaridad has supported coffee farmers in their 
transformation towards what the organization terms “Low-Carbon 
Agriculture” (LC-Ag). LC-Ag includes a set of five practices for coffee 
systems: 1) introduction or management of agroforestry systems (shade 
management); 2) soil conservation; 3) optimization of tree density;  
4) fertilization management; and 5) management of by-products  
(e.g., processing wastewater and producing compost). The process 
to transition coffee farmers to LC-Ag features a scheme of technical 
assistance, provided by local field staff that is hired by Solidaridad and 
46	 Although Solidaridad refers to 
their Low-Carbon Agriculture 
as the abbreviation “LCA,” this 
report uses “LCA” in reference 
to a “Life Cycle Analysis/Assess-
ment,” so a different abbrevi-
ation is used here, only for this 
report. 

41
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
project partners, which further reinforces the capacities of project partner 
staff to align with the model. The model includes initial training as well 
as follow-up field visits, both collective and individual. Additionally, the 
model promotes a Farmer Leader’s approach in which Solidaridad provides 
additional support and knowledge to lead producers and contributes to the 
establishment of mechanisms that will enable them to continually share 
knowledge with other community members. While support for an LC-Ag 
transition is initially offered by Solidaridad, jointly with local cooperatives 
and companies who are sourcing in the area, the organization strives to 
generate gradual internal adoption of the LC-Ag approach and practices. 
This allows LC-Ag-encouraged activities to be incorporated into existing 
ways of working among cooperatives and other enterprises, and further 
emphasizes the need for a train-the-trainer approach.
Increasing Emissions Before Decreasing to Support Long-Term  
Farmer Profitability
Producers who boast low-intensity agricultural systems and initiate an 
LC-Ag journey normally have only basic specialization in their crop and 
adopt a limited use of inputs. This often results in fewer GHG emissions 
overall, but productivity and profitability are prohibitively low. By engaging 
in the LC-Ag program and following the recommended practices, low-
intensity producers have seen their emissions increase by 494 kgs of CO2eq 
per hectare (a 70% increase on average) and by 0.3 kgs of CO2eq per 
kilogram of coffee (a 30% increase on average) in the short term. While 
this may seem counterintuitive for a low-carbon approach, the reason 
for its promotion is that productivity is expected to increase after the 
adoption of LC-Ag practices. These increases may require a 2-3-year cycle 
before results are shown, but as productivity increases and more LC-Ag 
practices are adopted, emissions per kg of coffee and by hectare are then 
reduced. On-farm deforestation tends to reduce as well, resulting in a more 
productive farm with lower environmental impact. In addition, and just as 
important, resilience and adaptation to climate change increases, ensuring 
producers are more likely to stay on their existing and productive land, and 
prevent the displacement of current coffee production areas.
Managing the Intersection Between Productivity and Emission Reduction
Producers with high-intensity coffee production systems who already 
implement some LC-Ag-recommended practices are still eligible to 
engage in the LC-Ag program, as they can aim to improve their efforts 
or apply more of the suggested practices. In such cases, lower emission 
rates and high productivity levels have been achieved as a result of better 
management practices. Where there is exemplary productivity and 
emission abatement with high-intensity farmers, it is important to consider 
how best to share their data. For example, when calculating emissions per 
hectare, versus emissions per kg of coffee, the same data inputs can lead 
to different emission scenarios. For farmers with higher production, for 
instance, emissions have been reduced on average by 8,870 kgs of CO2eq 
per hectare (66% decrease) as a result of ongoing LC-Ag implementation. 
Meanwhile, when calculated per kg of coffee, emissions have been reduced 
on average by 5.6 kgs of CO2eq (60% decrease).

42
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Overcoming Market Bottlenecks 
The main bottleneck in the transformation to LC-Ag is the lack of market 
incentives. While producers regularly invest in change and on-farm 
improvements, the market recognizes their efforts to only a limited degree. 
For this reason, Solidaridad led a market assessment before launching 
the LC-Ag program to understand the industry appetite for low-carbon 
coffee. They found a moderate interest that could grow or be consolidated 
over time as sector requirements around GHG reporting and emission 
reduction became clearer. There were, however, a few front-runners and 
forward-thinking companies that invested in and sourced LC-Ag coffee. 
Because interest was still moderate, only 1,753 metric tons of LC-Ag 
coffee (approximately 3% of the total LC-Ag production created by the 
participants of the project during its pilot period) were sourced as such 
between 2019 and 2021 by Finlays, RGC, and ofi (formerly Olam Coffee). 
Additionally, some companies invested in the model even when it was not 
connected to their sourcing (Finlays and a fourth international company). 
Currently, Solidaridad’s LC-Ag model is attracting more interested 
companies as Scope 3 and deforestation-free strategies are increasingly 
required by the sector.

43
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Glossary
Afforestation. The planting of new trees or forests on lands which 
historically have not been previously forested. 
Artificial Intelligence. The ability of a machine to simulate human 
intelligence, or of an object to be controlled by a computer, in order for it to 
conduct certain tasks that are normally completed by humans.
Carbon Footprint. Total GHG emissions (of a product, business, or other 
entity) expressed in CO2eq.
Carbon Neutrality. When there is a net contribution of zero CO2 to the 
atmosphere, as any amount of CO2 being emitted is subsequently being 
compensated by reductions or removals (refers only to carbon). Entities 
who emit more carbon and/or CO2eq than they remove are sometimes 
referred to as “carbon positive,” or even “net positive” for short (although 
the latter phrase does not always reference carbon or other GHG 
emissions). Entities who emit less carbon and/or CO2eq than they remove 
are conversely referred to by some as “carbon negative.”
Carbon Removal. Carbon removal, or carbon dioxide removal, occurs  
when CO2 is captured or removed from the atmosphere and sequestered 
for an extensive period of time. This can happen naturally, or by 
technological design.
CO2eq. Carbon dioxide equivalent, which converts the environmental 
impact of one ton of various GHG into their equivalents in CO2 based on a 
common denominator of each gas’ global warming potential (GWP).
Emission Hotspots. Areas or activities identified as generating or releasing 
a disproportionately high amount of GHG into the atmosphere, producing 
elevated risks.
Greenhouse Gasses (GHG). Gasses that trap heat in the atmosphere and 
warm the surface of the planet.
Global Warming Potential (GWP). The heat absorbed by any GHG in the 
atmosphere as related to the heat that would be absorbed by the same 
amount of carbon dioxide, over the same period of time.
Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHGP). An international GHG emission 
standard for the public and private sectors, co-developed by the World 
Resources Institute and the World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development.
Home Compostable. Something that can be composted via a longer,  
lower-temperature process and conducted in a home setting (home-

44
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
compostable packaging, for example, can be placed in a home compost  
bin alongside other organic waste; anything on the package, such as ink, 
can decompose).
Industrial Compostable. Something that requires a faster, higher-
temperature process of composting in a controlled industrial setting in 
order to break down.
Insetting (of Carbon). The implementation of actions or activities like those 
related to reforestation, renewable energy, and regenerative agriculture, 
to reduce emissions of GHG. Carbon insetting usually refers to reductions 
made within one’s own value chain, but can also lead to removals.
Life Cycle Analysis (LCA). Also known as “Life Cycle Assessment.”  
A measure of the total environmental impact of a product’s life cycle from 
cradle-to-grave, or from raw materials acquisition up to production, use, 
and final disposal.
Net Zero. A state in which all the GHG going into the atmosphere (emission 
sources) are balanced by removal of GHG out of the atmosphere (emission 
sinks) in the long-term, called for by the Paris Agreement. Net zero 
considers the goal to keep global warming under 1.5 degrees Celsius.  
For more information, visit https://netzeroclimate.org/what-is-net-zero/. 
Offsetting (of Carbon). An action or activity to reduce or remove 
emissions of carbon dioxide or other GHG from the atmosphere in order to 
compensate for emissions made elsewhere.
Reforestation. The planting of new trees or forests on lands that have been 
deforested, or in areas where tree cover has been decreasing.
Regenerative (Agricultural) Practices. An approach to land management 
that relies on practices such as no-till, cover cropping, crop rotation, etc., 
with the goal to reinstate and maintain balance among all components of 
the environment and to improve soil quality, plant nutrition, and soil carbon 
sequestration.
Remote Sensing. Satellite, drone, or aircraft technology allowing for 
the scanning of properties on the earth’s surface and the obtaining of 
information related to its features (e.g., vegetation).
Satellite Imagery. Images captured remotely via satellite technology.
Value Chain. The full scope of activities, from start to finish, needed to 
create and deliver a service or product to final consumers. 

45
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Bibliography
Acharya, Umesh and Lal, R. “Carbon Accounting for Coffee-Based Farming 
Systems.” World Coffee Research. 2021. https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/
resources/carbon-accounting-for-coffee-based-farming-systems.
Baca, Maria et al. “An Integrated Framework for Assessing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change and Developing Adaptation Strategies for Coffee Growing 
Families in Mesoamerica.” PLoS ONE 9(2): e88463 (February 2014). DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0088463.
Burkey, Nora and Criscione, E. “Algrano Market Trends Review: Coffee 
Sourcing and Production Trends in the Context of a New Price Boom.” 
Algrano. April, 2022.
https://www.algrano.com/en/learn/algrano-market-review-2022.
Hassard, Harry et al. “Product Carbon Footprint Product and Energy 
Analysis of Alternative Coffee Products in Japan.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 73 (June 2014): 310-321. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.02.006.
Hundertmark, Thomas et al. “Water: A Human and Business Priority.” 
McKinsey. May, 2020.
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/
water-a-human-and-business-priority.
Kilian, Bernard, Rivera, L., Soto, M., and Navichoc, D. “Carbon Footprint 
Across the Coffee Supply Chain: The Case of Costa Rican Coffee.”  
Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology 3 (January 2013): 151-175.  
https://pubs.incae.edu/pub/2686.
Lynch, John et al. “Agriculture’s Contribution to Climate Change and Role 
in Mitigation Is Distinct From Predominantly Fossil CO2-Emitting Sectors.” 
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 03 (February 2021).  
DOI: 10.3389/fsufs.2020.518039.
Panhuysen, Sjoerd and Pierrot, J. “Coffee Barometer 2018.” Hivos. 2018. 
https://hivos.org/assets/2018/06/Coffee-Barometer-2018.pdf.
Panhuysen, Sjoerd and Pierrot, J. “Coffee Barometer 2020.” Hivos. 2020. 
https://coffeebarometer.org/.
Rahn, Eric et al. “Climate Change Adaptation, Mitigation, and Livelihood 
Benefits in Coffee Production: Where are the Synergies?” Mitigation and 
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 19 (May 2013): 1119-1137.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-013-9467-x.
Rikxoort, Henk et al. “Carbon Footprints and Carbon Stocks Reveal 
Climate-Friendly Coffee Production.” Agronomy for Sustainable 

46
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Development 34, 4 (March 2014): 887-897. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/
hal-01234838/document.
Segura, Milena, and Hernan A. “Carbon Footprints in the Coffee (Coffea 
Arabica L.) Productive Chains with Different Certification Standards in 
Costa Rica.” Luna Azul (December 2012): 60-77.  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262670687_CARBON_
FOOTPRINTS_IN_THE_COFFEE_Coffea_arabica_L_PRODUCTIVE_CHAINS_
WITH_DIFFERENT_CERTIFICATION_STANDARDS_IN_COSTA_RICA.
Singer, Thomas. “Sustainability Disclosure Practices: 2022 Edition.” The 
Conference Board. January, 2022. https://www.conference-board.org/
topics/sustainability-practices/sustainability-disclosure-practices-2022.
Smith, Pete et al. “Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU).” 
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change: Contribution of 
Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, edited by Ottmar Edenhofer et al. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Solymosi, Katalin and Techel, G. “Brewing up Climate Resilience in the 
Coffee Sector: Adaptation Strategies for Farmers, Plantations, and 
Producers.” June, 2019.
https://www.sustaincoffee.org/assets/resources/Brewing_up_Climate_
Resilience_in_the_Coffee_Sector.pdf.
World Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development. “Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting 
Standard.” GHGP Protocol. September, 2011.

47
Carbon and Coffee: GHG Emission Reductions Progress and Strategies Across the Value Chain
Oak Lodge Farm, Leighams Road, 
Bicknacre, Chelmsford,
Essex, CM3 4HF
United Kingdom
United States
sca.coffee
505 Technology Drive, Suite 340 
Irvine, California 92618
