452
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000
© 2000 Institute of Food Technologists
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
JFS: Food Engineering and Physical Properties
Pore Structure of Coffee Beans
Affected by Roasting Conditions
S. SCHENKER, S. HANDSCHIN, B. FREY, R. PERREN, AND F. ESCHER
ABSTRACT: Hot-air roasting of coffee beans not only forms color and flavor compounds but also leads to a com-
plete alteration of the bean microstructure. The resulting pore structure controls mass transfer phenomena during
roasting and storage. The principal objective of the present project was to investigate the influence of different
roasting conditions on volume increase and pore-structure development. Coffee beans were roasted in 2 different,
well-defined roasting processes to equal degree of roast. Volumetry, mercury porosimetry, and electron microscopy
were employed to study structural product properties. The roasting conditions were found to have a major impact on
microstructure. High-temperature roasted coffees had greater bean volume, pore volume and larger micropores in
the cell walls as compared to low-temperature roasted beans.
Key Words: coffee beans, roasting, porosity, mercury porosimetry, scanning, electron microscopy
Introduction
H
OT-AIR ROASTING OF COFFEE BEANS IS A TRADITIONAL THER-
mal process, which in spite of its great importance in prac-
tice, is still designed and operated on an empirical basis. During
coffee roasting at temperatures above 200 C, drying takes place,
water is redistributed, and complex chemical reactions such as
Maillard reaction and pyrolysis are induced (Clarke and Macrae
1985; Illy and Viani 1995). Loss of water and organic mass leads to
large amounts of gases and causes high internal pressure. The for-
mation of color and flavor compounds is accompanied by a large
increase in bean volume and changes in ultrastructure of both the
cell wall and the cytoplasm of the green bean. In particular, it is as-
sumed that the roasting process alters the porosity of the cell wall
(Saleeb 1975; Puhlmann 1986; Massini and others 1990; Gutiérrez
and others 1993; Illy and Viani 1995; Wilson 1997).
Roasting-induced changes in pore structure have a major im-
pact on the final product quality. The pore structure controls
mass transfer phenomena during storage and determines the
high gas adsorption capacity and the degassing properties of the
roasted bean (Radtke 1975; Saleeb 1975; Massini and others
1990). Fine micropores allow the mobilized coffee oil to migrate
to the bean surface (Puhlmann 1986; Illy and Viani 1995; Wilson
1997). The loss of flavor compounds and the subsequent change
in flavor profile during storage (staling) are probably related to
the extent of exposure of inner surface and to the oxygen accessi-
bility (Holscher and Steinhart 1992; Gutiérrez and others 1993).
Both volume increase of the bean and development of pores
during roasting are known to be highly dependent on the roast-
ing conditions (Ortolá 1998). Therefore, the selection of appro-
priate roasting conditions to optimize microstructure presents a
major goal in roasting technology.
The macropore system of roasted coffee beans mainly con-
sists of excavated cells and has been described extensively using
light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and im-
age analysis procedures (Bürgin 1969; Dentan 1977; Dentan and
Illy 1985; Puhlmann 1986; Massini and others1990; Gutiérrez
1993; Illy and Viani 1995; Wilson 1997). Radtke (1975) reported
bean porosity values ranging from 0.38 to 0.49 depending on the
origin and the pretreatment of coffee. Kazi and Clifford (1985)
found different average cell sizes for “high yield” (34 to 40 m)
and “regular” coffees (21 to 23 m), respectively. Massini (1990)
described the development of pores in the course of roasting us-
ing SEM and reported the entire bean surface to be cracked after
10 min of roasting. The most comprehensive investigation on
coffee bean porosity has been presented by Gutiérrez and others
(1993). Various physical methods as well as SEM and image anal-
ysis were used to determine the porosity of coffee roasted at dif-
ferent temperatures to the same degree of roast. Again,
high-temperature roasted coffee was found to have a statistically
significantly higher macropore area than low-temperature roast-
ed products.
So far, very little is known on the formation of micropores in
the cell wall as affected by roasting conditions. According to Den-
tan (1977) cell walls of green coffee beans are crossed by numer-
ous plasmodesmata. Saleeb (1975) concluded from gas adsorp-
tion measurements that the macropores of roasted beans are ac-
cessible through very narrow micropores of molecular magnitude
(2.8 nm), which form a so-called ink-bottle structure. In contrast,
Wilson (1997) found no evidence of pre-existing channels within
the cell walls of the green beans, but 2 different types of mi-
cropores of an average diameter of 100 nm and 10 nm, respec-
tively, were present in roasted beans.
A direct microscopic visualization of micropores in the cell wall
is difficult. On the other hand, mercury porosimetry allows the
determination of pore volume and pore size distribution (Adam-
son 1990; Perren and Escher 1997). Our objective was to assess
mercury porosimetry on coffee and to investigate the influence
of different roasting conditions on the micropore system of cof-
fee beans. The application of mercury porosimetry to coffee re-
quires additional information for correct interpretation. In par-
ticular, the localization of mercury in intruded beans was studied
in frozen bean fractures by cryo-scanning electron microscopy
and energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis (Echlin 1992).
Results and Discussion
T
HE DEVELOPMENT OF BEAN VOLUME DURING HIGH- AND
low-temperature 
roasting 
is 
presented 
in 
Fig. 
1.
High-temperature conditions resulted in much higher expansion
rates as compared to low-temperature conditions. Figure 2 com-
pares the relative bean volume as a function of roast loss and
clearly shows the large difference between the 2 roasting pro-
cesses at a medium degree of roast. Also, volume increase was
steady in both processes as no instantaneous expansion is ob-
served that would lead to a discontinuity in the curve. Table 1
summarizes the volumetric and porosimetric measurements on
coffee samples from high-temperature short-time roasting pro-

Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE 453
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
cess (HTST) and  low-temperature long-time process (LTLT)
roasting. Depending on the time temperature program, a high-
or low-density coffee as expressed by bean density and bean po-
rosity may be obtained. Finally, the large expansion of cell vol-
ume is shown in the SEM micrographs in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 of a
green bean sample and a LTLT roasted bean sample, respective-
ly. The unusually thick cell wall in both the green and roasted
coffee bean should be noted in particular.
The pore size distribution in roast coffee was dominated by
small micropores in a very narrow dia range of 20 to 50 nm (Fig. 5).
At equal degree of roast curves of cumulated pore volume were in-
fluenced by the roasting conditions. High-temperature roasted
samples showed the major increase in cumulated pore volume
(∑rmain) to occur at slightly greater equivalent pore radius than
low-temperature roasted samples (13.45 nm versus 11.22 nm). A
significant difference between the 2 roasting processes was also
found for the final value of cumulated pore volume (Table 1).
Table 1—Influence of roasting conditions to equal roast loss on vol-
ume and pore characteristics of roasted beans
 HTST roasting
LTLT roasting
Roast loss (%)
14.95
15.01
Bean density (kg m-3)
622
747
Bean volume VB (mm3 g-1)
1609
1350
Hg-intruded volume VHg (mm3 g-1)
850
640
Bean porosity  = VHg/VB  (-)
0.528
0.474
Fig. 1—Development of relative bean volume increase during high-
and low-temperature roasting.
Fig. 2—Development of bean volume increase as a function of roast
loss during high- and low-temperature roasting.
Fig. 3—Cryo-SEM micrograph of cells in green coffee beans. Scale
bar = 10 m.
Fig. 4—Cryo-SEM micrograph of a cell in roasted coffee beans. Scale
bar = 10 m.

454
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
Pore Structure of Roasted Coffee Beans . . .
The volume increase of coffee beans during roasting is affected
by a driving force and, opposed to it, by structure resistance. De-
velopment of internal gas and water vapor imposes a driving force
for expansion, whereas the glass transition phenomena may play
an important role in structure resistance. Because the glass transi-
tion temperature Tg is greatly influenced by the product dehydra-
tion, the bean is assumed to develop from a more glassy state into
a more rubbery state and, finally, to fall back into a more glassy
state due to the low water content. The shift in balance between
force and resistance because of changes in temperature and water
content causes the steady and continuous increase of bean vol-
ume. Greater driving force and a more rubbery structure probably
led to greater volume increase at higher roasting temperatures. In
parallel to a greater bean volume cell lumina, represented by the
cumulated mercury-penetrated pore volume, were also larger in
high-temperature 
as 
compared 
to 
low-temperature 
roasted
beans. Therefore, while porosity values presented here are in the
same order as found by Radtke (1975), our conclusions contrast
those of Gutiérrez and others (1993) who did not find a significant
influence of roasting conditions on bean porosity.
SEM analysis of mercury-intruded roast coffee material re-
vealed a picture of still intact cell wall structure and
mercury-filled cell lumina (Fig. 6). No artifacts , such as structure
collapse due to high pressure during porosimetry, were ob-
served. The cell lumina were filled with spheres. The elemental
mapping of mercury in a freeze fracture across the cells is shown
in Fig. 7, while Fig. 8a and 8b show single-spot spectra of a sphere
Fig. 5—Influence of roasting process on porosimetric curves.
High-temperature roasted beans exhibit greater cumulated pore vol-
ume as compared to low-temperature roasted beans. Different sizes
of cell wall micropores are indicated by substantial differences in
rmain values.
Fig. 6—Cryo-SEM micrograph of cells in a roasted bean intruded with
mercury during porosimetric analysis. Integer cell wall structure with
mercury-filled cell lumina. Image width = 137 m.
Fig. 7a—Cryo-SEM micrograph of a roasted coffee bean intruded
with mercury during porosimetric analysis. Scale bar = 10 m.
Fig. 7b—Mercury mapping obtained by X-ray microanalysis of a roasted
coffee bean intruded with mercury (identical bean sample and sector
as in 7a). Scale bar = 10 m.

Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE 455
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
in the cell lumen and a cell wall cross-fracture, respectively. The
mapping clearly confirms that mercury does enter pores to the
full extent during porosimetry. A weak signal was even detected
in the cell walls.
Access for mercury to the cell lumina is provided by small mi-
cropores in the cell walls, forming a so-called ink-bottle pore sys-
tem. Therefore, only a high pressure corresponding to the small
size of the entrance pores allows for mercury penetration of the
cell lumina. Consequently, high values of apparent pore volume
for the micropores of the cell wall were obtained, while this corre-
sponded to the filling of the cell lumina. Hence, the pore size at
the maximum of the distribution function (rmain) represents the
size of cell wall micropores. Values for rmain fall between the 2 val-
ues reported by Wilson (1997) and are considerably higher than
the value proposed by Saleeb (1975). Also the equivalent pore
radius of these micropores was found to be significantly larger in
high-temperature roasted beans (Fig. 5). High-temperature
roasted beans may therefore exhibit increased permeability for
gas and oil and promote easier access for oxygen.
Applying high pressures to sensitive foodstuffs can be a limi-
tation of mercury porosimetry. It requires thorough evaluation of
the application, checking for artifacts and careful interpretation
of the results. The stability of coffee bean tissue exposed to mer-
cury porosimetry is mainly due to the very thick cell walls. The
withdrawal of a minor part of intruded mercury during the pres-
sure release procedure could not be prevented. Nevertheless,
the main part of mercury was trapped and remained in the cell
lumen. The formation of mercury spheres was because of con-
tamination of mercury with cell components. Residual mercury
Fig. 8a—Net counts of mercury from X-ray microanalysis in a cell of a
roasted coffee bean intruded with mercury during porosimetric analy-
sis.
Fig. 8b—Net counts of mercury from X-ray microanalysis in the cell
wall of a roasted coffee bean intruded with mercury.
within the micropores of the cell walls may have caused the weak
mercury-signal in the elemental spectra. The slight but continu-
ous increase in cumulated pore volume observed in green beans
(Fig. 5) may be caused by micropores to some extent and/or rep-
resent an artifact due to compression of coffee oil at high pres-
sure. The concept of mercury porosimetry is based on a series of
idealizing assumptions, such as a cylindrical shape of the intrud-
ed pores.
The question of origin and structure of the micropore sys-
tem within the cell wall is not yet answered satisfactorily. It is
still unclear whether this micropore system consists of count-
able discrete microchannels such as plasmodesmata rather
than of a complex 3-dimensional permeable wad-like network
of polysaccharide. The existence of modified plasmodesmata
channels in roast coffee cell walls was confirmed by transmis-
Fig. 10—Cryo-SEM micrograph of the surface of a high-temperature
roasted bean after 1 d of storage. Numerous very small oil droplets
covering the surface show the beginning oil migration process and
indicate the presence of an extensive network of micropores.
Fig. 9—TEM micrograph of a cell wall in a partially roasted bean. The
continuous dark line is formed by the middle lamella, which lays be-
tween the thick cell walls and remainings of cytoplasm of 2 adjacent
cells. Dark lines perpendicular to the middle lamella are parts of modi-
fied plasmodesmata channels through the wall. Image width = 9.06 m.

456
JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE—Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
Pore Structure of Roasted Coffee Beans . . .
Table 2—Roasting parameters for HTST and LTLT process and typi-
cal properties of roasted products
HTST roasting
LTLT roasting
Process parameters:
Hot-air flux (m3s-1)
0.01885   0.00079
Hot-air temperature (°C)
260  0.5
220   0.5
Hot-air humidity
dry (no air recirculation; no
water added)
Roasting time(s)
155 ... 180
540 ... 720
Cooling
cold air; bean temperature  40 °C
reached within 60 s
Product properties (typical values):
Color (L*/a*/b*)
24.06 / 9.26 / 11.33
24.02 / 9.27 / 11.17
Roast loss (%)
15.33
15.81
Water content (g H2O/100g coffee)
2.68
2.15
sion electron microscopy (TEM) analysis (Fig. 9). However,
these channels are cell-to-cell connections and do not provide
access to the bean surface, which then would allow for degas-
sing and oil migration. SEM-analysis (Fig. 10) of the bean sur-
face in the state of the beginning oil migration process shows
numerous very small oil droplets covering more or less the en-
tire surface. These findings may support the model of a 3-di-
mensional permeable wad-like network of polysaccharides,
where the latter have been partially degraded and removed
during roasting. In this case, increased polysaccharide degra-
dation at higher temperatures could be the cause for the wider
cell wall micropores found in high-temperature roasted sam-
ples.
Conclusions
M
ERCURY POROSIMETRY IS A VALID AND USEFUL METHOD FOR
investigating pore structure of roast coffee. Micropores in
the range of 20 to 50 nm dia in the cell walls allow for mercury
penetration of the cell lumina. At the same degree of roast, roast-
ing conditions have a major impact on the structural product
properties of coffee beans. High-temperature roasted beans ex-
hibit greater bean volume, cumulative pore volume, and larger
micropores in the cell walls compared to low-temperature roast-
ed coffees. Larger micropores may promote faster degassing and
oil migration as well as enhanced oxygen accessibility and accel-
erated loss of flavor compounds. The origin and structure of the
micropore network in the cell wall remains unclear.
Materials and Methods
Raw material and roasting
Two wet-processed Coffea arabica Linn. varieties from Co-
lombia and Costa Rica were obtained from a Swiss import com-
pany. The green bean water content was 10.8%and 11.1%
(wb), respectively. Roasting experiments were carried out with
a fluidized-bed hot-air laboratory roaster in batches of 100 g
green beans. For the present experiments, samples were roast-
ed in a high-temperature short-time roasting process (HTST)
and a low-temperature long-time process (LTLT) defined in
Table 2. Roasting was monitored and controlled by online tem-
perature measurements, and, to describe roasting dynamics,
samples were removed at regular intervals during roasting and
analyzed. In order to be able to compare the 2 processes, roast-
ing was targeted to the same degree of roast, based on overall
weight loss and final product color. Typical product properties
are also presented in Table 2. All samples that were used for
porosimetric analysis had a roast loss of 15%, which in practice
corresponds to a “medium degree of roast.”
Color measurement
Color was measured with a tristimulus colorimeter Chroma
Meter CR-310 (Minolta, Japan) with a measured reflection area
of 19.6 cm2. Ground coffee samples were placed in a petri dish
and gently pressed by hand with equal force to form an even
surface. Results were depicted in the CIE L*a*b* color space.
Volumetry
A displacement method based on a system described by
Mohsenin (1986) was used to determine bean volume and
bean density. A small container was filled with peanut oil (den-
sity 910 kg m3 at 25 C) and placed on a balance. Thirty g of
roasted beans were weighed into a wire basket that was sus-
pended on a support beside the balance. The basket was im-
merged into the oil and moved up and down for 15 s in order to
release air bubbles trapped between the beans. The oil sur-
face tension and the limited immersion time assured a negligi-
ble amount of oil penetrating the pores of the sample. Immer-
sion was carried out likewise with the empty basket. The
weight difference of the immersed basket with and without
coffee beans corresponds to the weight of oil displaced by the
beans, and bean volume was calculated using oil density.
Bean density was computed as ratio of bean weight in air and
bean volume. Relative bean volume at progressing roasting
was based on the volume of green beans, taking the weight
loss during roasting into account.
Mercury-porosimetry
Porosimetry was carried out using a mercury-porosimeter
Carlo Erba 2030 (Carlo Erba Strumentazione, I-Rodano) com-
prising a macro- and a micropore unit. About 0.4 g roast coffee
(4 to 5 bean halves) were placed in a dilatometer and evacuat-
ed in the macropore unit for some 15 min. The dilatometer was
carefully filled with mercury and then transferred to the mi-
cropore unit. The pressure was gradually increased to 400 MPa
(4000 bar) during 45 min, and the volume of intruded mercury
recorded. For samples used in SEM analysis, a high-pressure
release rate of 16 bar s1 was applied, in order to partially pre-
vent mercury from withdrawing out of the pores. Pressure val-
ues were converted into values of “equivalent pore radius” r,
based on the Washburn equation (Adamson 1990), which de-
scribes a linear relationship between the size of an intrudable
circular pore and the applied mercury pressure. The pore radi-
us corresponding to the maximum in the distribution function
is defined rmain  maximum dV/d log (r/r0), whereby V  cumu-
lated pore volume and r0  1 m (normalization, dimensionless
exponent). Porosity  was defined as the ratio of absolute vol-
ume per g bean and absolute volume of intruded mercury per
g bean.
Cryo-Scanning electron microscopy (Cryo-SEM)
The bean-pore structure was investigated by cryo-SEM,
with a Philips 515 microscope (Philips, The Netherlands)
equipped with a SEM cryo unit (SCU 020, Bal-Tec, Balzers,
Principality of Liechtenstein). Pieces of beans were frozen in
liquid nitrogen, fractured by a scalpel, and transferred to the
cold stage of the preparation chamber. The samples were ex-
posed to 80 C for 10 min under p  2104 Pa and
cryo-sputtercoated with 15 nm platinum. The specimens were
examined at a temperature below 130 C at an accelerating
voltage of 12 kV.

Vol. 65, No. 3, 2000—JOURNAL OF FOOD SCIENCE 457
Food Engineering and Physical Properties
Energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis
Elemental analysis was performed in the Philips SEM,
equipped with a Tracor® Northern energy-dispersive X-ray
analysis system and as described in detail by Frey and others
(1996). The microscope was operated at an accelerating volt-
age of 25 kV and a working distance of 12 mm. Elemental map-
ping was carried out by energy window mapping. The spatial
resolution was 64 	 64 pixels with a dwell time of 0.1 s. All spec-
tra in the spot mode were acquired at a magnification of 10 000
for 60 s (live time) and a dead time of 24 s (40%) in the energy
range of 0 to 13 keV.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Sample preparation for TEM analysis was carried out with a
modified procedure according to Angermüller and Fahimi
(1982). Small bean pieces were fixed in half-strength Kar-
novsky fixative at room temperature for 1 h. After washing in
0.1 M phosphate buffer, postfixation was done for 1 h in 1% os-
mium tetroxide in 0.1 M imidazole buffer. Samples were then
rinsed in distilled water and dehydrated in a graded series of
ethanol with stepwise embedding in Epon/Araldite resin. Ul-
trathin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead cit-
rate before examining in a Hitachi H-600 transmission electron
microscope at 100 kV. Images were digitally recorded using a
Gatan slow-scan CCD camera.
References
Adamson AW. 1990. Physical Chemistry of Surfaces. 5th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
567 p.
Angermüller S, Fahimi HD. 1982. Imidazole-buffered osmium tetroxide: an excellent stain
for visualisation of lipids in transmission electron microscopy. Hist J 14: 823-835.
Bürgin E. 1969. Unbehandelter und behandelter Kaffee unter dem Mikroskop. Proceed. 4th
ASIC Colloquium: Paris. p 63-73.
Clarke RJ, Macrae R, editors. 1985. Coffee, Volume 1: Chemistry. 1st ed. London: Elsevier
Applied Science. 306 p.
Dentan E. 1977. Structure fine du grain de café vert. Proceed. 8th ASIC Colloquium; Paris.
p 59-64.
Dentan E, Illy A. 1985. Étude microscopique de grains de café matures, immatures et imma-
tures fermentés Arabica Santos. Proceed 11th ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 341-368.
Echlin P, editor. 1992. Low-Temperature Microscopy and Analysis. New York: Plenum Press.
Frey B, Scheidegger C, Günthardt-Georg MS, Matyssek R. 1996. The effects of ozone and
nutrient supply on stomatal response in birch (Betula pendula) leaves as determined by
digital image-analysis and X-ray microanalysis. New Phytologist 132:135-143.
Gutiérrez C, Ortolá MD, Chiralt A, Fito P. 1993. Análisis por meb de la porosidad del café
tostado. Proceed. 15th ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 661-671.
Holscher W, Steinhart H. 1992. Aromaveränderungen beim Altern von Röstkaffee. Lebens-
mittelchemie 46:106-111.
Illy A, Viani R, editors. 1995. Espresso coffee. 1st ed. London: Academic Press Ltd. 253 p.
Kazi T, Clifford MN. 1985. Comparison of physical and chemical characteristics of “high
yield” and “regular” coffees. Proceed. 11th ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 297-308.
Massini R, Nicoli MC, Cassarà A, Lerici CR. 1990. Study on physical and physicochemical
changes of coffee beans during roasting. Note 1. Italian J Food Sci (2):123-130.
Mohsenin NN. 1986. Physical properties of plant and animal materials. 2nd revised and
updated ed. New York: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers Inc. 891 p.
Ortolá MD, Londoño L, Gutiérrez CL, Chiralt A. 1998. Influence of roasting temperature on
physicochemical properties of different coffees. Food Science and Technology Interna-
tional 4:59-66.
Perren R, Escher F. 1997. Investigations on the hot air roasting of nuts. The Manufacturing
Confectioner 77(6):123-127.
Puhlmann R, Sobek E, Bartsch G. 1986. Strukturveränderungen der Kaffeebohne im Röst-
prozess. Lebensmittelindustrie 33(6):278-279.
Radtke R. 1975. Das Problem der CO2-Desorption von Röstkaffee unter dem Gesichtspunkt
einer neuen Packstoffentwicklung. Proceed. 7th ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 323-333.
Saleeb FZ. 1975. Adsorption of carbon dioxide on roast and ground coffees. Proceed. 7th
ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 335-339.
Wilson AJ. 1997. Preliminary investigations of oil biosynthesis in the coffee cherry. Proceed.
17th ASIC Colloquium; Paris. p 92-99.
MS 19990446 received 4/26/99, revised 12/27/99, accepted 3/30/00.
We gratefully acknowledge the funding of this work by G.W. BARTH GmbH & Co., Germany;
support of Keme Food Engineering AG, Haco AG and Migros Betriebe Birsfelden AG, Swit-
zerland; and the Institute of Geotechnical Engineering, ETH Zurich, for putting the
porosimeter at our disposal.
Authors Schenker, Handschin, Perren, and Escher are with the Swiss Fed-
eral Institute of Technology (ETH), Institute of Food Science, CH-8092 Zurich,
Switzerland. Author Frey is with the Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow
and Landscape Research (WSL), CH-8903 Birmensdorf, Switzerland. Di-
rect correspondence to F. Escher (E-mail: escher@ilw.agrl.ethz.ch).
