The Storage of Green Coffee (Coffea arabica): Decrease of Viability
and Changes of Potential Aroma Precursors
DIRK SELMAR*, GERHARD BYTOF and SVEN-ERIK KNOPP
Institute for Plant Biology, Technical University Braunschweig, Mendelssohnstr. 4, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
Received: 1 August 2007
Returned for revision: 21 August 2007
Accepted: 17 September 2007
Published electronically: 2 November 2007
† Background and Aims When green coffee is stored for a prolonged time the coffee quality decreases distinctively.
Apart from well-known ‘off-notes’ that arise from undesired oxidations of lipids, a typical ‘ﬂattening’ of the cup
quality is detectable. In order to elucidate the biological causes for this phenomenon, differentially processed
coffees (wet, dry, semi-dry processing), were stored under standard conditions for 2 years and analysed
comprehensively.
† Methods Wet-processed coffee was stored either as parchment coffee, where the endocarp remained around the
beans or as hulled beans. Viability of coffee seeds was estimated using the tetrazolium-test of seed viability.
Changes in concentration of free amino acids and soluble carbohydrates were analysed by HPLC.
† Key Results Whereas all other coffees lost viability within the ﬁrst 6 months of storage, coffee beans stored within
the parchment remained viable for .1 year. Glucose and fructose decreased slightly in the course of storage and
glutamine content declined signiﬁcantly. However, the changes observed in sugar and amino acid content were
not correlated with the viability of the coffee beans. Consequently, neither typical metabolic reactions occurring
within living cells nor characteristic post-mortem reactions could be responsible for the observed changes. As a
result of post-mortem reactions in re-imbibed seeds, a characteristic bluish-green colour developed, putatively
due to the oxidation of chlorogenic acids and subsequent reactions with primary amino compounds. This coloration
might be an appropriate marker to substantiate if coffee seeds had been stored for an expanded time and putative
quality losses were not relevant so far.
† Conclusions It is suggested that loss of viability is relevant for the aroma ﬂattening. As neither metabolic nor post-
mortem reactions were responsible for the observed changes, it is concluded that Maillard reactions that occur during
storage might be the cause of the decrease in potential aroma precursors.
Key words: Coffea arabica, coffee processing, post-harvest treatment, storage, loss of viability, viridinic acid.
INTRODUCTION
Coffee represents one of the most important crops of the
world. As its volume of sales depends on coffee quality,
much attention is paid to quality improvement and mainten-
ance. When green coffee is stored for a prolonged time, its
quality decreases distinctively, expressed by a typical ﬂat-
tening and slackening of the cup quality (Wurziger et al.,
1982; Scheidig and Schieberle, 2006), apparently related
to a reduction in the aroma potential in the green bean.
As a consequence, the provenience-speciﬁc characteristic
features, especially those of top quality coffees, gradually
diminish during the course of elongated storage. In contrast
to the so-called ‘off-notes’, which also occur during the
course of storage, and are mainly caused by undesired
changes within the lipid fraction due to oxidation processes
(Janı´cek and Pokorny´, 1970; Kurzrock et al., 2005; Speer
and Ko¨lling-Speer, 2006), the causes of the progressive
weakening of cup quality are still unknown. The appearance
of storage-related off-notes can largely be controlled by
appropriate storage of the green coffee, whereas the ﬂatten-
ing of the cup quality occurs even under optimal storage
conditions.
Traditionally, green coffee is produced either by wet
or
dry
processing
methods.
In
wet
processing,
red,
ripe coffee cherries are mechanically depulped and the
mucilaginous residues of the pulp are degraded by fermen-
tation. The resulting beans are still covered by the endocarp,
termed parchment. The parchment coffee is dried, con-
ditioned and subsequently hulled. In contrast, in dry proces-
sing, entire coffee fruits are dried without removal of the
pulp and then hulled mechanically.
The chemical composition of the green coffee beans
differs signiﬁcantly depending on the processing method
applied (Bytof et al., 2005; Knopp et al., 2006). In both
cases, the freshly processed coffee beans remain viable
(Huxley, 1964; Cle´ves, 1998) and exhibit active metabolic
processes (Selmar et al., 2005, 2006). During the course
of storage, the coffee seeds die (Bacchi, 1958; Huxley,
1964; Coutouron, 1980).
In the past, various authors have argued that the decline
in cup quality is linked to the loss of viability (Sivetz and
Desrosier, 1979), but scientiﬁc proof for this statement is
lacking. Although some investigators have analysed the
time course for loss of germination capacity, only limited
data for changes in composition of stored coffee beans
are available (Pokorny et al., 1975). At present, no compre-
hensive approach to clarify the relationship between the
viability of green coffee, the chemical composition and
the corresponding cup quality have been published. In
this paper, an extensive time course of the viability loss
during storage under standard conditions is presented.
Furthermore, data for both qualitative and quantitative
* For correspondence. E-mail d.selmar@tu-bs.de
# The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Annals of Botany 101: 31–38, 2008
doi:10.1093/aob/mcm277, available online at www.aob.oxfordjournals.org
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

changes of free amino acids and soluble sugars within the
coffee beans during storage are reported. Special emphasis
is put to an assumed processing speciﬁc behaviour of the
stored green coffee beans, in particular with respect to puta-
tive inﬂuences of the dying procedure. The feasibility of
utilizing the information obtained in practice during green
coffee production and storage is outlined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Green coffee processing
Deﬁned green coffee samples were produced under carefully
controlled processings at the facilities of Ipanema Agricola
Ltda, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. For these sample pro-
cessings, only sound and fully mature red coffee fruits of
C. arabica var. acaia´ were used. The coffee fruits were
processed in parallel (wet, dry, semi-dry) in three indepen-
dent repetitions.
In order to use truly ‘identical samples’ for each type of
processing, the mature, red and sound fruits, which were
used for dry processing, were obtained by careful manual
sorting, an operation which in the case of wet processing
is performed by ﬂotation based sorting steps and the
depulping machine that rejects the green unripe coffee cher-
ries. Subsequently, the dried fruits were mechanically
hulled.
Coffee samples were sent by airfreight to the laboratory
in Braunschweig within 4 weeks of ﬁeld processing.
Wet processing. Coffee fruits were mechanically depulped
using a Pinhalense drum pulper, and submitted to 22 h of
under-water tank fermentation. Subsequently, the washed
parchment coffee beans were dried on separate plots of a
sun terrace. The desired water content of 11–12 % (wet
basis) was achieved after 6 d. About half of the material
was mechanically hulled; the other half remained as
unhusked parchment coffee.
Semi-dry processing. This method consists of a shortened
wet processing sequence, in which the fermentation step
to remove the mucilaginous residues of the pulp is
omitted. Depulped coffee beans from the same batch used
for the wet processing were transferred immediately after
depulping to a sun terrace and dried to the desired water
content of 11–12 % (wet basis), before the material was
mechanically hulled.
Dry processing. Coffee cherries from the same batch as
above were dried as whole fruits on a sun terrace until
they reached the desired water content of 11–12 % (wet
basis).
Storage of green coffees
The hermetic storage of green coffee was performed in
two large glass-boxes (200 L) under constant conditions
[22 8C and 63 % relative humidity (rh)] for up to 2 years.
To ensure that the desired rh was maintained, samples
were stored above vessels containing saturated (NH4)2NO3
solution according to Vertucci and Roos (1993). The result-
ing water vapour pressure corresponds to a rh that is in
equilibrium with the 11.5 % moisture of the coffee beans
(Stirling, 1981). In order to avoid marked changes in the
storage climate when samples are taken, the coffee speci-
mens were
previously
divided
and placed in
500-g
samples in small linen bags. In total, 120 bags, from
three independent series of processing, each yielding four
variations (dry, and semi-dry-processed green coffee, and
wet-processed, hulled green coffee and wet-processed, non-
hulled or ‘parchment coffee’), were distributed in equal
numbers to each box. At selected times (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9,
13, 18 and 24 months), one bag of each treatment was with-
drawn, corresponding to 12 samples for each date.
Test of viability
Changes in the viability of green coffee seed samples
were estimated by the common triphenyl tetrazolium chlo-
ride (TTC) test (Dias and da Silva, 1986). Coffee beans
allowed to imbibe water overnight were subsequently
sliced into thin discs about 2 mm thick. These slices were
then incubated for several hours (4–8) in TTC solution
(1 % in 50 mM Na-phosphate buffer, pH 7.6). In viable
seeds, the cells import TTC, reduce it and form a red
dye: whereas this reaction does not occur in dead seeds
(Fig. 1).
Sensory assessment
Prior to the storage experiments, all samples were evalu-
ated by professional tasters at Ipanema Agricola Ltda,
Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Sensory assessments of the
stored samples were performed by sensory boards of the
industrial partners, mainly from Tchibo and Kraft Foods.
FIG. 1. Viable (top) and dead (bottom) coffee seeds. After the coffee
beans were sliced in thin discs, they were incubated in TTC solution. In
viable seeds the cells import TTC, reduce it and a red dye is formed. In
a dead seed this reaction does not occur.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
32
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

Extraction and determination of glucose and fructose
The content of glucose, fructose and other sugars was
determined by high performance anion exchange chromato-
graphy (HPAEC) according to Knopp et al. (2006). To
exclude variability due to individual seed variations, 60
sound and faultless beans were weighed and pooled as
one sample, frozen with liquid nitrogen and ground to a
ﬁne powder using a Retsch MM 200 ball mill. The
powder was then lyophilized and 50-mg aliquots of the
freeze-dried powder were transferred to a centrifuge tube.
These were mixed with 5 mL of hot ethanol (80 % v/v,
80 8C) and 100 mL internal standard (7 mmol L21 meleci-
tose in A.dest.). The mixture was extracted in an ultrasonic
bath (80 8C, 10 min) and centrifuged (3000 g, 5 min). The
pellet was washed twice at room temperature with ethanol
(60 % v/v). The supernatants were combined, evaporated
to dryness and dissolved in water (10 mL) using ultrasoni-
cation (10 min). In order to bind phenolic substances, a
small quantity of polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) was
added prior to ultrasonication. After adjusting the total
volume to 50 mL, an aliquot was centrifuged in order to
remove the PVPP (3000 g, 5 min). The supernatant was
further puriﬁed on a Sep-Pak C18-cartridge (Waters). The
clear eluate was used for HPAEC (DIONEXw BIO-LC
HPAEC-PAD with a DIONEXw PA20 column). Flow was
0.5 mL
min21.
The
column
temperature
was
30 8C.
Detection was carried out using a DIONEXw-ED50 electro-
chemical detector with gold electrode. All calculations were
made with Chromeleon software (version 6.4) was used.
Separation was performed with the following concentration
changes of NaOH (step and linear gradients): 17 !
12.5 mmol L21 in 9.5 min; 12.5 ! 28 mmol L21 as step;
28 mmol L21 for 8 min; 28 ! 108 mmol L21 as step;
108 mmol L21 for 11.5 min).
Extraction and determination of free amino acids
The content of free amino acids was determined by high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) according to
Bytof et al. (2005). As described above, 60 sound and fault-
less beans were weighed and pooled as one sample in order
to exclude variabilities due to individual seed variations.
Aliquots (500 mg) of these powders were used for extrac-
tion. After adding norvaline (0.8 mmol per sample) as the
internal standard, the powder was repeatedly extracted
with sulphosalicylic acid (4 % w/v). The extracts were
adjusted to 100 mL, centrifuged and ﬁltered.
The amino acids were derivatized with o-phthaldialdehyde
priortoHPLCanalysis.Theo-phthaldialdehyde-derivatization
procedure was performed according to Kirchhoff et al.,
1989; however, a Spark Holland Midas autosampler was
used for derivatization and sample injection. The amino
acid
derivatives
were
separated
on
a
C18
column
(Nucleosil 100, 5 mm, Macherey & Nagel, 250  4.0 mm)
using a binary gradient (A: 5 % MeOH, 5 % ACN, 2 %
THF, 88 % 50 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 6.2; B: 40 %
MeOH, 40 % ACN, 20 % sodium acetate buffer) at a ﬂow
rate of 1.3 mL min21. The derivatives were detected by
means of an RF-551 Shimadzu ﬂuorescence detector
(lex ¼ 334 nm; lem ¼ 425 nm) and quantiﬁed by external
calibration.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Commercial green coffee is stored up to 3 years (Scheidig
and Schieberle, 2006). Prolonged storage is accompanied
by typical decline of quality, which apparently is caused
by changes in the quantitative and qualitative composition
of substances present in the coffee beans. It has been
argued that the loss of viability is related strongly to the
decline in quality (Sivetz and Desrosier, 1979). However,
until the present, it is not known, whether the related
changes in the chemical composition of the beans are due
to either metabolic reactions in the living seeds or to post-
mortem processes. In this paper the three different topics,
i.e. the decline of viability, and the changes in potential
aroma precursors and the cup quality are investigated and
discussed comprehensively to establish a basis for new
approaches in quality preservation during storage.
Decrease of viability during the course of storage
Tetrazolium chloride staining during storage of the green
coffee samples revealed a rapid decrease in viability, as
noted previously (Huxley, 1964; Coutouron, 1980). In all
samples that were hulled prior to storage, .50 % of the
seeds lost viability within the ﬁrst 3 months of storage.
After 6 months, the fraction of seeds still viable was ,10 %.
After 1 year of storage, all seeds were dead (Fig. 2). The
mode of processing had no effect on the time course of via-
bility loss. In contrast, the so-called ‘pergamino’ or ‘parch-
ment coffees’ (German: ‘Hornschalenkaffee’) revealed a
different pattern. These coffee beans were stored within
the parchment (endocarp) and, although these samples
were derived from the same processing batch as the corre-
sponding wet-processed samples, the loss of viability was
quite different. Even after a longer storage period than 1
FIG. 2. Decrease of viability of coffee seeds during storage. Green coffee
was stored at 20 8C and 60 % rh for up to 2 years. The viability was deter-
mined using the TTC test described in Fig. 1.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
33
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

year, more than half of the beans stored as parchment coffee
were still alive (Fig. 2).
Under natural conditions, within dried and slowly rotting
fruits, coffee seeds retain their viability for longer than
6 months (Velasco and Guitierrez, 1974; Rojas, 2004) and
by applying special storage conditions for each crop,
coffee seeds can remain viable even for a longer time
period. However, the water content of seeds in the naturally
rotting fruits, as well as the water content of the coffee
seeds stored as seed material, is far higher than that
present in processed green coffees (11 %). Consequently,
the much longer period of viability under natural conditions
or for breeding purpose is explained by the signiﬁcantly
greater water potential in the seeds (Valio, 1976; Van der
Vossen, 1980). This does not, however, explain the differ-
ences in viability between parchment coffees and those
hulled prior to storage: all samples had the same residual
water content of 11.5 %. Thus, the marked increase in the
period of viability of coffee seeds must be the consequence
of another factor: the parchment. There is no clear expla-
nation for the positive inﬂuence of the parchment on the
viability. One possible explanation could be based on
differences in the microclimate surrounding the seeds, i.e.
composition of the air within the parchment might be some-
what different from outside. This would mean that,
although all samples were stored in the same box, the com-
position of the air covering hulled seeds might be different
from that surrounding the seeds stored in their parchment.
However, as the parchment represents a dead and relatively
dry sclerenchymatic tissue, there should be no major diffu-
sion barriers for any of the gases present around the seeds,
i.e. CO2, O2 or H2O (Wootton, 1970; Valio, 1980).
Alternatively, the reason for the different behaviour of the
differentially treated seeds could be mechanical stress
during the course of the hulling process. It cannot be
excluded that this physical stress resulted in damage or inju-
ries that are subsequently responsible for the relatively fast
death of the treated seeds. However, the hulling of the wet-
processed parchment coffee and the husking procedure of
dry-processed coffee fruits make up quite different mechani-
cal stresses, and yet both wet- and dry-processed seeds are
identical with respect to loss of seed viability. Further
research is therefore needed to ﬁnd an explanation for the
strong viability-enhancing effect of the parchment, which
obviously affects also the cup quality of stored coffees
(see below).
Post-mortem reactions in coffee seeds
To estimate the germination rate of coffee seeds that had
been stored for various time periods, coffee beans were
soaked for 12 h in water and subsequently transferred
onto moist ﬁlter paper. As expected, most viable seeds ger-
minated in about 2–3 weeks. Surprisingly, these experi-
ments also generated an additional and unusual result.
Imbibition by coffee seeds that had died a number of
months before resulted in a characteristic appearance.
During imbibition by dead seeds, many, mainly brownish
substances leaked out, due to the disintegration and decom-
partmentation of the seeds. In contrast, imbibition of seeds
that had been dead for only a few days or weeks resulted in
a quite different picture: 2–3 d after imbibition, the dead
seeds had acquired a dark blue-green colour (Fig. 3A).
The characteristic blue-green colour is known as viridinic
acid (German: ‘Viridinsa¨ure’). This results from the
oxidation of chlorogenic acids and subsequent reaction
with primary amino compounds (Watanabe et al., 1996;
Yabuta et al., 2001). Similar reactions are frequently
visible as the result of injuries that occur during wet proces-
sing, especially in the course of mechanical pulping and
demucilation (Fig. 3B). However, their occurrence follow-
ing imbibition of coffees beans that had died only a few
days or weeks before has not been reported so far.
Whereas in vitro the corresponding oxidation might be
initiated by alkalization (Yabuta et al., 2001), in situ it is
catalysed by enzymes, probably polyphenoloxidases and
laccases.
Direct contact of enzyme and substrates should be a pre-
condition for such enzymatic oxidation; this may occur in
the course of decompartmentation due to cell-death-related
disintegration. As mentioned above, the formation of the
blue-green compounds only took place in seeds that died
within a short time period preceding evaluation. However,
in seeds that had lost viability several months before
FIG. 3. (A) Formation of a blue-green dye in dead coffee seeds. The seeds
shown had been stored for about 4 months and lost their viability between 3
and 4 months of storage. On the left, an unimbibed seed is displayed. The
seed on the right was allowed to imbibe for one night and subsequently
incubated for 2 d on moist ﬁlter paper. (B) Formation of a blue-green
dye in injured coffee seeds. After traditional wet processing and mechan-
ical mucilage removal (aquapulping), these seeds had been stored for 1 d
under moist conditions in order to improve quality (Selmar et al., 2005).
Major and minor injuries result in the typical generation of the chlorogenic
acid-based blue-green dye.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
34
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

imbibition, these oxidation-induced processes could not
observed, although in all cases the tissues of the dead
seeds
would
have
disintegrated.
Consequently,
the
enzymes that are responsible for the post-mortem oxidation
of chlorogenic acids are still active in seeds that have died
within a short period preceding imbibition. In contrast,
these oxidative enzymes were already inactive in stale
seeds because of denaturation processes that proceeded
during the storage of dead seeds.
The conversion of chlorogenic acids was observed only
when the dead seeds had imbibed water and did not occur
during the course of standard storage. Thus, it can be
deduced that the water content of 11 % in the stored seeds
is not sufﬁcient to permit the characteristic post-mortem
reactions. This might be because either the required com-
prehensive decompartmentation of cells may not occur
before rehydration takes place or the diffusion of enzyme
or substrates is strongly limited by water shortage in the
stored seeds. In general, it is assumed that in cells with a
residual water content of ,20 %, water availability is
restricted to the degree that the entire metabolism of the
cell is shut down. Consequently, in coffee seeds with 11 %
residual water, no regulated metabolic reaction should
take place. However, even in these coffee seeds some reac-
tions must occur, in particular, those which result in the per-
manent decrease of viability when seeds with 11 % residual
water content are stored. In this context, the so-called after-
ripening processes, whose molecular basis is still unknown,
could be relevant (Finch-Savage and Leubner-Metzger,
2006). These processes are thought to be the basis for
gene expression during seed storage in air-dried, low-
hydrated tobacco seeds with an overall moisture content
of
about
8–13 %
(Leubner-Metzger,
2005),
and
are
believed to be responsible for the breaking of seed dor-
mancy
in
orthodox
seeds
(Leubner-Metzger,
2005;
Finch-Savage and Leubner-Metzger 2006). If this novel
developmental mechanism for seed dormancy release
could also be relevant in non-orthodox seeds is not
known and needs to be clariﬁed.
The observed changes in the composition of substances
during green coffee storage may also be due to disinte-
gration processes of biomembranes that take place within
the lipid phase. The properties of the biomembranes are
not markedly inﬂuenced by the residual water content of
the cytoplasmic (¼ water) phase. However, much more
research is needed to understand the various processes
involved. Nevertheless, since only those coffee beans that
have recently died develop this characteristic blue-green
colour, the related seeds had been stored only for a very
limited period of time as ‘dead seeds with still active
enzymes’. In seeds that had been stored markedly longer,
the corresponding enzymes are already inactivated. It is
assumed that the typical quality losses during prolonged
storage might be generated only in dead seeds that had
been stored for a prolonged time; therefore, the develop-
ment of blue-green colour could be a good hint, or even
an appropriate marker, to substantiate that coffee seeds
had not been stored for an extended time and putative
quality losses due to prolonged storage times had not yet
occurred.
The inﬂuence of prolonged storage on the contents
of potential aroma precursors
During roasting of coffee beans, reducing carbohydrates
and free amino acids form the majority of the coffee roast
aroma compounds in the course of Maillard reactions and
subsequent Strecker degradations. These compounds are
important aroma precursors (Flament, 2001). In order to
estimate if their composition in coffee seeds changes in
the course of standard storage, the amounts of amino
acids and the low molecular carbohydrates were quantiﬁed.
Carbohydrates
As already reported by Knopp et al. (2006), the concen-
trations of glucose and fructose are strongly inﬂuenced by
the mode of processing. In dry-processed beans, the con-
centration of these two sugars is markedly higher than in
wet-processed beans. The levels of these sugars in beans
originating from a semi-dry process are between those of
wet- and dry-processed beans. Consequently, the starting
points of the corresponding curves are quite different. The
content of soluble sugars in green coffee seeds is subject
to high individual variation (Knopp et al., 2006) caused
by individual differences in the expression of metabolic
processes. Therefore, the corresponding analyses were per-
formed using aliquots of composite samples based on 60
seeds that were mixed during grinding. The resulting data
of
the
three
independent
experiments
still
revealed
notable amounts of variation, but the characteristic differ-
ences due to the certain processing method were clear.
During storage, the relatively high content of glucose
present in dry-processed green coffees decreased markedly
(Fig. 4A). The same behaviour occurred in semi-dry-
processed coffees. A similar tendency might also be recog-
nized for the minor concentration present in wet-processed
green coffees, although the corresponding concentration
differences are relatively small. Despite the striking differ-
ences with respect to viability, there was no notable differ-
ence between the wet-processed seeds that had been hulled
before storage and those stored within their parchment.
Changes
in
fructose
concentration
showed
a
similar
pattern to that observed for glucose, although the overall
storage-related decrease was not so pronounced in dry and
semi-dry-processed seeds and no signiﬁcant changes were
detected for wet-processed beans (Fig. 4B). At ﬁrst sight,
these results contradict the observation of Bucheli et al.
(1998), who found an increase in glucose under moist
storage conditions, i.e. 85 % rh. However, these authors
also detected a signiﬁcant decrease in sucrose, and they
argued that the sucrose is hydrolysed during storage
to yield glucose and fructose. In contrast to the storage
of green coffee under standard conditions mentioned
above (i.e. 63 % rh), where most metabolic reactions are
prevented, storage at 85 % rh does not lead to complete
inhibition of enzymatic reactions.
Sucrose represents the major sugar in green coffee
(Bradbury, 2001; Knopp et al., 2006). A content of
about 7.5 g 100 g21 d. wt was estimated as a mean
value for the samples used for the storage experiments.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
35
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

This corresponds to a total concentration about 50 times
higher than that of glucose. The determination of storage
dependent changes in sucrose concentration was affected
by high individual variations. Nevertheless, overall, a slight
decline in sucrose content from about 7.5 g 100 g21 d. wt
in unstored beans, to about 7.0 g 100 g21 d. wt in those
which had been stored for 2 years, was detected. If this
small decline in sucrose concentration might also be due to
residual enzymatic hydrolyses as mentioned by Bucheli
et al. (1998) is not known. These workers found that, in
Robusta coffees stored under moist conditions (85 % rh), up
to 40 % of the sucrose is degraded. However, the slight
decrease in the sucrose content observed in this work may
also have been caused by other reactions (see below).
The three minor sugars, galactose, arabinose and rham-
nose, whose
concentrations are between
1.0 mg and
4.0 mg 100 g21 d. wt each, correspond to about 1–2 % of
the glucose concentration (Knopp et al., 2006). In contrast
to the major sugars, the content of galactose, apart from
some marked vacillations, did not show any signiﬁcant
storage-dependent changes (data not presented): The galac-
tose concentration in unstored beans as well as in those that
had been stored for 2 years was about 2.5 mg 100 g21 d. wt.
With respect to arabinose, after 24 months, in the dry-
processed coffee a storage-dependent increase from about
2.0 mg 100 g21 d. wt to about 4.5 mg 100 g21 d. wt was
observed, whereas in all other samples the arabinose con-
centration did not change. A different pattern was observed
for rhamnose. From an initial average rhamnose concen-
tration of about 0.25 mg 100 g21 d. wt the mean value
increased 10-fold during storage to a ﬁnal value of about
2.5 mg 100 g21 d. wt. With the exception of arabinose,
for all carbohydrates so far mentioned, i.e. glucose, fruc-
tose, sucrose, galactose and rhamnose, there was no signiﬁ-
cant difference in the changes observed when wet, dry or
semi-dry-processed coffees were compared.
In all cases so far analysed, the pattern of storage-
dependent changes of each sugar was not inﬂuenced by
the presence of the parchment. Moreover, the curves for
wet-processed hulled green coffees were identical to those
for the corresponding parchment coffees. This ﬁnding was
surprising if it is considered that in contrast to the hulled
beans, the parchment coffees were viable during most of
the storage period. From this it must be deduced that the
changes in sugar composition during the course of storage
cannot be correlated with the fact that the seeds are either
dead or alive. Consequently, neither any metabolic reaction
nor any post-mortem reaction initiated by cell death-
induced decompartmentation could be the only conclusive
explanation for the changes observed. An explanation for
this phenomenon is still lacking. However, a promising
explanation might be based on the knowledge that in
foods with little residual water, non-enzymatic browning
processes, like Maillard reactions, are known to occur.
Pokorny et al. (1975) proposed that these sugar-consuming
reactions might occur in green coffee beans. Moreover,
these reactions are known to occur also in aged seeds of
soybean
(Wettlaufer
and
Leopold,
1991;
Sun
and
Leopold,
1995).
Whether
Maillard
reactions
are
the
causes of the observed changes in the sugar concentration
needs to be investigated further.
Free amino acids
As mentioned above, in addition to the soluble carbo-
hydrates, the concentrations of free protein amino acids
and their putative changes during prolonged storage were
also analysed to register comprehensively the effects of
storage on coffee quality. As outlined previously (Arnold
et al., 1994; Arnold and Ludwig, 1996; Bytof et al.,
2005; Selmar et al., 2005), the individual concentrations
of most amino acids, as well as the overall content of all
amino acids of green coffee beans, vary markedly, and
are strongly affected by various environmental factors
FIG. 4. (A) Changes in glucose content during storage of green coffees.
The content of glucose was determined by HPAEC. Each value corre-
sponds to a single independent determination of an aliquot of a composite
sample of 60 sound and faultless beans for each treatment. Corresponding
double determinations revealed that the s.d. of the HPAEC quantiﬁcation
was always ,6 %. To demonstrate the extent of natural variations within
the single treatments (wet, dry, etc.), not the mean values, but the individ-
ual data are presented. The corresponding s.d. varied strongly between
,1 % and .20 %. (B) Changes in fructose content during storage of
green coffees. The content of fructose was determined by HPAEC. Each
value corresponds to a single independent determination of an aliquot of
a composite sample of 60 sound and faultless beans for each treatment.
Corresponding double determinations revealed that the s.d. of the
HPAEC quantiﬁcation was always ,6 %. To demonstrate the extent of
natural variations within the single treatments (wet, dry, etc.), not the
mean values, but the individual data are presented. The corresponding
s.d. varied strongly between ,1 % and .20 %.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
36
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

(provenances, altitude, etc.), by the maturity of the seeds,
and by the processing methods. In this work, these factors
can be excluded as identical batches of manually sorted
coffee fruits were processed in parallel under deﬁned
conditions.
The green coffees used for the storage experiments con-
tained about 4000 mg amino acids kg21 d. wt, being in the
upper range of concentrations determined earlier (Arnold
and Ludwig, 1996; Selmar et al., 2005). In contrast to
most other batches analysed so far, no major differences
between the amino acid content of the differentially pro-
cessed
coffees
were
observed
(data
not
presented).
Typically higher concentrations of amino acids have been
detected for wet-processed beans than for dry-processed
beans (Selmar et al., 2005). Nevertheless, with respect to
the content of g-amino butyric acid (GABA), reported to
be a reliable marker to distinguish between differentially
processed green coffees (Bytof et al., 2005), the coffee
used for the storage experiments revealed the typical
pattern, i.e. high GABA concentrations in the dry-processed
beans and minor concentrations in the wet-processed beans.
However, the actual GABA concentrations estimated for
dry-processed samples (approx. 700 mg kg21 d. wt) were
lower than those reported by Bytof et al. (2005). At
present, it is still an open question which additional
factors – apart from the intensity and length of drought
stress during the drying process – may affect the corre-
sponding
GABA
production
and
the
corresponding
accumulation of this amino acid, respectively.
During the course of storage no signiﬁcant changes,
either in the total content of protein amino acids or in the
concentration
of
most
individual
amino
acids,
were
detected. Moreover, GABA concentrations remained con-
stant; only the concentration of glutamine decreased signiﬁ-
cantly during storage (Fig. 5). The peculiar behaviour of
glutamine in comparison to other amino acids is surprising,
although, if it is considered that the decrease in glucose and
fructose might be caused by Maillard reactions occurring at
room temperature during the course of prolonged storage
(see above), at least some amino acids must be consumed.
If indeed, under these conditions, glutamine in particular
is entering Maillard reactions is not established. More
insight into the various reactions that occur during the
course of prolonged storage is required.
Sensory assessment of stored green coffees
The sensory assessment of processing speciﬁc differ-
ences only makes sense, when identical coffee samples,
treated in parallel are used for cupping. This precondition
excludes the majority of coffee production sites, since
almost all factories are predestined either for wet or for
dry processing. At Ipanema Agricola Ltda in Brazil wet,
dry and semi-dry processing are all performed routinely.
The corresponding coffees used for the storage experiments
exhibited the typical processing-speciﬁc characteristics, i.e.
the dry process coffees were denoted by a full body whereas
the wet-processed ones had more acids and revealed a more
pronounced aroma. The aroma and taste of semi-dry coffees
were in-between these two types.
After 1 year of storage, the coffees exhibited the typical
ﬂat aromas and partially some old and woody notes.
Although the sensory evaluations were characterized by
estimating only slight differences between the various
samples, a loss in cup quality was reported for all the
green coffees stored for a long time. In many cases, after
storage of only 6 months, raspy, woody or stale notes
were attributed to the samples. Indeed, in most of cases,
the beans that were stored within the parchment were
given slightly better quality descriptions than the hulled
beans. Due to the large variations and faint differences,
only a tendency towards beneﬁcial effects for storage of
green coffee within the parchment was perceived. Apart
from that, no principal differences in the decrease of
quality could be detected between the hulled coffees,
regardless of the processing methods used (dry, wet or
semi-dry).
In order to establish the advantageous effect of storage of
green coffees within the parchment, corresponding experi-
ments with a focus on high-quality coffees, e.g. high-grown
washed arabica coffees, should be performed. It is assumed
that the sensory differences between coffees stored as either
hulled or parchment beans will be far higher because slight
differences are likely to cause more drastic effects in the
case of high quality coffees.
CONCLUSIONS
The major outcome of this work is the ﬁnding that green
coffee beans that are stored within the parchment (perg-
amino) remain viable far longer than hulled beans and
that this maintenance of viability apparently has a positive
effect on the preservation of green coffee quality during
prolonged storage. In addition, gradual decreases in the
content of various sugars, notably glucose and fructose,
and some amino acids were not correlated with the
gradual loss of viability. Thus, the gradual ﬂattening of
the aroma during prolonged storage may be correlated
with loss of viability and not with changes in the compo-
sition of sugars and amino acids. Therefore the gradual
FIG. 5. Changes in glutamine content during storage of green coffee. The
content of glutamine was determined by HPLC. Each value corresponds to
a single independent determination of an aliquot of a composite sample of
60 sound and faultless beans for each treatment. Corresponding double
determinations revealed that the s.d. or the HPLC quantiﬁcation was
always ,5 %.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
37
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 

loss of viability appears to be the reason for the decline of
quality during prolonged storage under standard conditions,
although it was not possible to substantiate the changes
responsible in the chemical composition.
To preserve the quality of green coffee, storage of
wet-processed
arabica
coffees
within
parchment
is
recommended. Even shipping of green coffee as parchment
coffee should be considered, although this would mean that
the dry mills for hulling and sorting must be available in the
destination countries.
Finally, it is suggested that the occurrence of the blue-
green colour that develops in post-mortem reactions in
re-imbibed seeds might provide a good hint or may be an
appropriate marker to conﬁrm that coffee seeds have not
been stored for an extended time and putative quality
losses due to prolonged storage times have not yet occurred.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research project was supported by the FEI (Forschung-
skreis
der
Erna¨hrungsindustrie,
Bonn,
Germany),
the
Arbeitsgemeinschaft industrieller Forschungsvereinigungen
and the Ministry of Economic Affairs (project nos AIF-FV
13234 and 13588). We thank Mrs Yvonne Evers, Technical
University Hamburg–Harburg for permission to use the
photograph of injured coffee beans (Fig. 4B).
LITERATURE CITED
Arnold U, Ludwig E. 1996. Analysis of free amino acids in green coffee
beans. II. Changes of the amino acid content in arabica coffees in con-
nection
with
post-harvest
model
treatment.
Zeitschrift
fu¨r
Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Forschung 203: 376–384.
Arnold U, Ludwig E, Ku¨hn R, Mo¨schwitzer U. 1994. Analysis of free
amino acids in green coffee beans. I. Determination of amino acids
after precolumn derivatization using 9-ﬂuoromethylchloroformate.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Forschung 199: 22–25.
Bacchi O. 1958. Estudos sobre a conservac¸a˜o de sementes. IV. Cafe´.
Bragantia 17: 261–270.
Bradbury AGW. 2001. Carbohydrates. In: Clarke RJ, Vitzthum OG, eds.
Coffee: recent developments. Oxford: Blackwell Science, 1–17.
Bucheli P, Meyer I, Pittet A, Vuataz G, Viani R. 1998. Industrial storage
of green Robusta coffee under tropical conditions and its impact on
raw
material
quality
and
ochratoxin
A
content.
Journal
of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 46: 4507–4511.
Bytof G, Knopp SE, Schieberle P, Teutsch I, Selmar D. 2005. Inﬂuence
of processing on the generation of g-aminobutyric acid in green
coffee beans. European Food Research and Technology 220:
245–250.
Cle´ves SR. 1998. Tecnologia en beneﬁciado de cafe´. San Jose´, Costa Rica:
Tecnicafe´ Internacional S.A.
Couturon E. 1980. Le maintien de la viabilite´ des graines de cafe´iers par
le controˆle de la teneur en eau et de la tempe´rature de stockage. Cafe´,
Cacao, The´ 24: 27–32.
Dias MCL, daSilva WR. 1986. The tetrazolium test for viability evalu-
ation of coffee bean seed. Pesquisa Agropecuaria Brasileira 21:
1139–1145.
Finch-Savage WE, Leubner-Metzger G. 2006. Tansley review: seed dor-
mancy and the control of germination. New Phytologist 171:
501–523.
Flament I. 2001. Coffee ﬂavor chemistry. New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons.
Huxley PA. 1964. Investigations on the maintenance of viability of
Robusta coffee seed in storage. Proceedings of the International
Seed Test Association (Wageningen) 29: 423–444.
Janı´cek G, Pokorny´ J. 1970. Changes of coffee lipids during the storage
of
coffee
beans. Zeitschrift fu¨r
Lebensmitteluntersuchung
und
-Forschung A 144: 189–191.
Kirchhoff PM, Biehl B, Crone G. 1989. Peculiarity of the accumulation
of free amino acids during cocoa fermentation. Food Chemistry 31:
295–311.
Knopp SE, Bytof G, Selmar D. 2006. Inﬂuence of processing on the
content of sugars in green arabica coffee beans. European Food
Research and Technology 223: 195–201.
Kurzrock T, Ko¨lling-Speer I, Speer K. 2005. Effects of controlled
storage on the lipid fraction of green arabica coffee beans. In:
20e`me Colloque Scientiﬁque International sur le Cafe´, Bangalore,
India,
11–15
Octobre
2004
Paris:
Association
Scientiﬁque
Internationale du Cafe´ (ASIC), 161–168.
Leubner-Metzger G. 2005. b-1,3-Glucanase gene expression in low-
hydrated seeds as a mechanism for dormancy release during
tobacco after-ripening. The Plant Journal 41: 133–145.
Pokorny J, Con NH, Smidrkalova E, Janı´cek G. 1975. Non-enzymic
browning. XII. Maillard reactions in green coffee beans on storage.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Forschung 158: 87–92.
Rojas J. 2004. Green coffee storage. In: Wintgens JN, ed. Coffee: growing,
processing,
sustainable
production.
Weinheim:
Wiley-VCH,
733–750.
Scheidig C, Schieberle P. 2006. Einﬂuss der Lagerung von Rohkaffee auf
das
Aroma
von
Rohkaffee,
Ro¨stkaffee
und
Kaffeegetra¨nk.
Lebensmittelchemie 60: 55–56.
Selmar D, Bytof G, Knopp SE, Bradbury A, Wilkens J, Becker R.
2005. Biochemical insights into coffee processing: quality and
nature of green coffees are interconnected with an active seed metab-
olism. In: 20e`me Colloque Scientiﬁque International sur le Cafe´,
Bangalore,
India,
11–15
Octobre
2004
Paris:
Association
Scientiﬁque Internationale du Cafe´ (ASIC).
Selmar D, Bytof G, Knopp SE, Breitenstein B. 2006. Germination of
coffee seeds and its signiﬁcance for coffee quality. Plant Biology 8:
260–264.
Sivetz M, Desrosier NW. 1979. Hulling, classifying, storing, and grading
green coffee beans. In: Sivetz M, Desrosier NW, eds. Coffee technol-
ogy. Westport, CT: The Avi Publishing Company, 117–169.
Speer K, Ko¨lling-Speer I. 2006. The lipid fraction of the coffee bean.
Brazilian Journal of Plant Physiology 18: 201–216.
Stirling H. 1981. Storage research on Kenya arabica coffee. In: 9e`me
Colloque Scientiﬁque International sur le Cafe´, London. Paris:
Association Scientiﬁque Internationale du Cafe´ (ASIC), 189–200.
Sun WQ, Leopold AC. 1995. The Maillard reaction and oxidative stress
during aging of soybean seeds. Physiologia Plantarum 94: 94–104.
Valio IFM. 1976. Germination of coffee seeds (Coffea arabica L. cv.
Mundo Novo). Journal of Experimental Botany 27: 983–991.
Valio IFM. 1980. Inhibition of germination of coffee seeds (Coffea
arabica L. cv. Mundo Novo) by the endocarp. Journal of Seed
Technology 5: 32–39.
Van der Vossen HAM. 1980. Methods of preserving the viability of
coffee seeds in storage. Kenya Coffee 45: 31–35.
Velasco JR, Guitierrez J. 1974. Germination and its inhibition in coffee.
Philippine Journal of Science 103: 1–11.
Vertucci CW, Roos EE. 1993. Theoretical basis of protocols for seed
storage. II. The inﬂuence of temperature on optimal moisture levels.
Seed Science Research 3: 201–213.
Watanabe S, Ushizawa Y, Kusama M. 1996. Effect of pH on green pig-
ments produced from chlorogenic acid and glycine. Journal of the
Japanese Society of Food Science and Technology 43: 1–6.
Wettlaufer SH, Leopold AC. 1991. Relevance of Amadori and Maillard
products to seed deterioration. Plant Physiology 97: 165–169.
Wootton AE. 1970. The storage of parchment coffee. Kenya Coffee 35:
144–147.
Wurziger J, Drews R, Suche B. 1982. U¨ ber Ro¨stkaffees aus abgelagerten
Rohkaffees. Kaffee und Tee Markt 32: 3–5.
Yabuta G, Koizumi Y, Namiki K, Hida M, Nameki M. 2001. Structure
of green pigment formed by the reaction of caffeic acid esters (or
chlorogenic acid) with a primary amino compound. Bioscience,
Biotechnology and Biochemistry 65: 2121–2130.
Selmar et al. — Storage of Green Coffee
38
 at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro on January 13, 2016
http://aob.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 
