Implication of Sensory Evaluation and Quality Assessment 
in Food Product Development: a Review
FABIAN DOMINICUS MIHAFU1*, JOSEPH YOHANE ISSA2 
and MOSES WITNESS KAMIYANGO3 
1Department of Applied Sciences, Mbeya University of Science and 
Technology, Mbeya, Tanzania.
2Centre for Innovation and Industrial Research, Malawi University 
of Science and Technology, Limbe, Malawi.
3Department of Applied Sciences, Malawi University of 
Science and Technology, Limbe, Malawi.
Abstract
The quality of food products is determined by physical properties, chemical 
composition, the level of contaminants (microbiological and toxic substances) 
and sensory attributes. Consumers around the world demand consistent 
supply of quality food products that reflect the value of the price they pay 
for them. The nature of raw materials and ingredients reflect the quality of 
food products in the market. Raw materials as well as packaging materials 
should be purchased based on the quality specifications that suppliers should 
adhere to. This review aimed at highlighting the importance of using objective 
assessment tools and consumer/sensory evaluation in determining the quality 
and acceptability of new food products. Objective tests are used to measure 
one particular attribute of a food product rather than its overall quality. They are 
generally rapid, reliable and repeatable. On the other hand sensory methods 
measure the reaction to stimuli resulting from the consumption of a product. 
Sensory testing is often used to determine consumer acceptability of a food 
product and contributes to the design of quality systems hence considered 
as a technical support for quality assurance during food production. Not only 
that but also it helps to obtain feedback for making decisions and carrying out 
proper modification of a particular food product. Therefore objective methods 
and sensory evaluation are indispensable tools for routine quality control of 
new food products as well as the existing ones.
	
Current Research in Nutrition and Food Science
www.foodandnutritionjournal.org
ISSN: 2347-467X, Vol. 08, No. (3) 2020, Pg. 690-702
CONTACT Fabian Dominicus Mihafu 
 fmihafu21@gmail.com 
 Department of Applied Sciences, Mbeya University of Science 
and Technology, Mbeya, Tanzania.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Enviro Research Publishers. 
This is an 
 Open Access article licensed under a Creative Commons license: Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY).
Doi: 10.12944/CRNFSJ.8.3.03
 
Article History 
Received: 26 June 2019
Accepted: 11 November
2019
Keywords
Consumers;
Contaminants;
Food Safety;
Food Quality;
Objective Tools.

691
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
Introduction
Globally consumers demand consistent supply of 
high quality foods. Food quality may encompass 
parameters such as organoleptic characteristics, 
physical, functional properties, nutritional value 
and consumer protection from adulteration; on the 
other hand food safety is more associated with the 
content of various food chemical and microbiological 
characteristics.1 Food safety can be measured via 
the examination of food items with regard to their 
microbial contamination, chemical contaminants 
or presence of physical foreign matter.1 There is 
general view that food safety is of great concern 
especially when it comes to human health, and 
various efforts have been dedicated by several 
sectors to ensure that safer foods are obtained to 
the highest degree possible.1 
In many developing countries consumers are 
substantially conscious about the existence of 
potential risks in their foods, hence the need for 
safety and quality standards in all stages along the 
food supply chain.3 The impact of this awareness 
often observed when consumers buy foods that are 
made by big companies rather than the smaller ones, 
as they believe that quality products are normally 
produced by big companies.4
In developing countries, mid-size and small 
companies develop new food products and introduce 
them to the market, however these products are 
usually made from non-standardized materials 
and processes resulting into quality variations.5 
Poor quality control is common to small scale food 
processing enterprises and has been considered as 
the cause of the enterprises’ weakness in terms of 
price, quality and delivery performance. Identifying 
internal and external requirements is imperative for a 
consistent improvement and maintenance of quality 
hence consumer satisfaction.6
In any company or organization, employee 
responsiveness, motivation and satisfaction are 
needed for ensuring quality, and the prevention of 
errors and faults should be preferred to detection 
and correction.7 Food companies need to build 
their product specifications on consumer likings and 
ensure that markets are segmented on the basis of 
consumer wants and needs.4 This is why most big 
companies use objective tests and subjective tests/
sensory evaluation as a daily routine to maintain 
safety and quality of food products.8
Objective tests/tools include physical, chemical 
and microbiological analyses of foods,8 whereas 
subjective tools comprise of discriminative tests, 
descriptive tests and affective tests. They are 
essential part of both new product development 
and quality control, they also support marketing 
and marketing research activities.9 In many cases 
quality means different things to different people, for 
example the appearance of the commodity is the 
most critical factor in the initial purchase while texture 
and flavor may determine subsequent purchases 
10. The purpose of this review is to highlight the 
importance of using objective assessment tools 
and consumer/sensory evaluation in determining 
the quality and acceptability of new foods or food 
products.
Quality Control Programs 
The major role of quality control programs is to 
ensure that raw materials and finished products are 
handled, processed, packaged and stored according 
to the required standards. Giovannucci and Satin11 
highlighted the fundamental functions of a quality 
control programs as:  
•	
Physical and chemical evaluation of raw 
materials and processed products.
•	
In-process control of i) Raw materials, 
ingredients and packaging supplies ii) 
Processing parameters and iii) Finished 
products. 
•	
Microbiological analysis of raw materials and 
finished products. 
•	
Control of storage and handling environments. 
•	
Sanitation and waste products control. 
•	
Assurance that final products are within the 
established legal and marketing standards.   
Type of Objective Evaluation Methods and their 
Significance In Quality Assessment of Foods or 
Food Products
Objective methods involve the use of instruments 
in carrying out evaluation of various attributes in 
food instead of human sensory organs. They are 
important in identifying contaminants in foods 
and uncover faulty processing and adulteration.8 
These tools include chemical tests which are used 

692
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
for the determination of chemical composition as 
well as chemical and metal contaminants in foods; 
microbiological methods that are used for detecting 
microbial contamination, insect excreta and other 
fragments in foods; and physical methods which 
are used for measuring characteristics like texture, 
viscosity, color intensity, turbidity and fill weight 
among others.8 These methods focus on the 
determination of a specific characteristic of a food 
product than its overall quality. Usually they measure 
an attribute of the food that has a major effect on 
quality, so instruments need to be standardized with 
materials having properties that are comparable 
to the foods to be tested. To ensure quality and 
acceptability of new food products, objective tests 
should go hand in hand with sensory evaluation.8
Physical Methods
The physical methods deal with attributes like 
appearance (size and shape), texture, color, 
viscosity, turbidity, firmness and imperfection, 
not only that but also process variables such as 
headspace, fill weight, drained weight and vacuum.12 
These are the rapidest methods which involve the 
least amount of training.12, 13 Appearance factors 
are useful in sizing and grading, which ensure 
uniformity and enhance the process of buying and 
selling. Therefore appropriate grading improves the 
quality of end products. Physical properties of food 
are important for the proper product designing and 
the prediction of the foods’ response to processing, 
distribution and storage conditions. 
Chemical Methods 
These are used for quantitative and qualitative 
evaluations, as well as determination of nutritive 
values in foods. The composition of a food largely 
determines its safety, nutrition, physicochemical 
properties, quality attributes and sensory 
characteristics.14 Chemical substances also play an 
important role in food production and preservation. 
For instance, coloring agents make food more 
attractive, flavorings make food tastier and stabilizers 
prolong the shelf life of food while food supplements 
are used as sources of nutrition.14 Chemicals 
have a variety of toxicological properties, some of 
which might cause negative effects in humans and 
animals.15 The control of food quality and safety is 
based on the determination of chemical composition 
as well as chemical and metal contaminants such as 
heavy metals and other toxic substances which can 
lead to acute poisoning and other health effects.16 
Usually, chemical substances are not harmful unless 
we are exposed to levels beyond standards for a 
long time. In new product development, chemical 
methods are useful in establishing safe levels which 
in turn notify decision makers who regulate the use 
of chemicals in foods or seek to limit their presence 
in the food chain.17
Chemical Contaminants in Foods
Chemicals of greatest concern for health are 
naturally occurring toxins, these include mycotoxins, 
marine biotoxins, cyanogenic glycosides and toxins 
occurring in poisonous mushrooms. Staple foods 
such as cereals (maize, sorghum, wheat) and nuts 
(peanut) can contain high levels of mycotoxins 
(aflatoxin and ochratoxin) produced by Aspergillus. 
A long-term exposure to these mycotoxins could 
cause cancer and affect normal development and 
immune system.14
Dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are 
example of persistent organic pollutants that can 
accumulate in the environment and human body. 
Dioxin is highly toxic substance that can cause 
reproductive and developmental problems, great 
human exposure to dioxin is through foods such as 
meat and dairy products, fish and shellfish. Health 
effects of dioxins to human include skin lesions 
and altered liver function. It may also results into 
compromised immune system, nervous system, 
endocrine system and reproductive functions. 
Additionally, chronic exposure of animals to dioxins 
has been reported to cause several types of 
cancer.18, 19, 20
Metal Contaminants in Food
Heavy metals such as lead, mercury, arsenic, 
cadmium, chromium and nickel are naturally 
occurring chemical compounds, they can be present 
at various levels in the soil, water and atmosphere.21 
Metals can also occur as residues in food as a result 
of human activities like farming, industrial operations 
and automobile exhausts.16 Exposure to these 
metals is through both naturally occurring and man-
made chemical compounds present at various levels 
in the environment including contaminated foods 
and water.22 During food product development they 
must be checked to ensure food quality and safety.17 

693
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
Concentrations of these metals are enhanced by 
human activities and can enter plant, animal and 
human tissues through inhalation, diet and manual 
handling which in turn can bind structural proteins, 
enzymes and nucleic acids hence interfering 
their normal functioning.23 Generally, long-term 
exposure to toxic heavy metals is associated with 
carcinogenic, circulatory, central and peripheral 
nervous system effects.16
Table 1: Heavy metals and their effects to human health
Metal	
Acute exposure 	
Chronic exposure 
Lead	
Loss of appetite, headache, hypertension,  	
Mental retardation, birth defects, allergies, 
	
abdominal pains, renal dysfunction, fatigue	
weight loss, paralysis, anemia, kidney
	
and sleeplessness	
and brain damage
Mercury	
Diarrhea, fever and vomiting 	
Microtubule destruction, swollen gums and
	
	
mouth, mitochondrial damage, nephrotic 	
	
	
syndrome and  lipid peroxidation
Cadmium 	
Pneumonitis (lung inflammation) and 	
Cancer (lung, liver, bladder and skin) and 	
	
oxidative stress	
proteinuria (excess protein in urine) 
Arsenic 	
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, Encepha-	
Diabetes, cancer and Hypopigmentation/
	
lopathy, arrhythmia and painful neuropathy	
Hyperkeratosis
Chromium	
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, hemolysis,	
Pulmonary fibrosis and lung cancer 
	
acute renal failure, breathing problems 	
Nickel	
Allergic reactions	
 Reproductive and developmental  effects
Source: Interdisciplinary toxicology15 Duruibe et al21 CHSR17 CHSR- Center for Hazardous Substance 
Research 
Therefore, chemical methods are crucial during food 
product development as they help safeguarding the 
quality of new food product and hence consumers’ 
health. 
Microbiological Methods
These methods are used in detecting food 
contamination by microorganisms such as bacteria 
and fungi (yeast, mold), also used to detect the 
presence of insect fragments, insect excreta and 
other foreign materials in food products.24 For 
efficient quality control programs, they require 
significant training of the technical personnel to 
properly interpret results. Microorganisms can 
cause food poisoning and spoilage which principally 
affect food quality, major pathogens for this include 
Clostridium perfringens, Escherichia coli (O157:H7) 
and Shigella spp.25
Microorganisms are all over the place and they are 
commonly found in faeces, soil and water; rats, 
mice, insects and pests; domestic, marine and 
farm animals (e.g. dogs, fish, cows, chickens and 
pigs); and human body parts (bowel, mouth, nose, 
intestines, hands, fingernails and skin).26
 
Soil-borne microorganisms such as clostridia are 
common on raw vegetables, while Clostridium 
botulinum are targeted when designing processing 
steps to destroy them. Many food borne microbes 
are present in intestines, hides, feathers of healthy 
animals which are raised for food. For example, 
Salmonella serotypes have been scientifically 
found to infect a hen's ovary.27 Salmonella spp 
have been a particular concern with foods of 
animal origin (e.g. meat, poultry, eggs and dairy 
products).28 For Campylobacter spp, the most 
common foodborne species are Campylobacter 
jejuni and Campylobacter coli. Members of this 
genus are susceptible to environmental stresses 
and cause gastroenteritis associated with headache, 
diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain and muscle pain.29

694
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
Environmental contamination may result from different 
sources including ingredients used in processing, 
either directly or indirectly, worker’s hands, shoes, 
walls and floors. In food processing, food borne 
microbes can be introduced through humans who 
handle the food, or by cross contamination from 
some other raw agricultural materials and/or the 
establishment environment.30 Insect damage, 
physical injury, enzymatic degradation and microbial 
activity can make food undesirable for human 
consumption.27 Toxigenic pathogens create food 
“poisoning” by producing an enterotoxin in the food, 
a good example is staphylococcal enterotoxin-
induced illness. Common foodborne bacteria are 
Campylobacter, Salmonella (non-typhoidal), Listeria 
monocytogenes, E. coli (O157:H7), Clostridium 
perfringens, Staphylococcus and Shigella spp.27
On one hand, food spoilage can be caused by 
molds, these are the major agents especially in 
vegetables where bacterial growth is not favored 
(e.g. low pH). Most molds invade plant tissue 
through surfaces such as a bruise or crack and 
spores are frequently deposited at these sites by 
insects for instance Drosophila melanogaster, the 
common fruit fly.30 Yeasts, molds and lactic acid 
bacteria can as well spoil fermented vegetables 
such as sauerkraut and pickles, not only that but 
also other acid foods like salad dressings and 
mayonnaise. Spoilage in fermented vegetables is 
often manifested by off odors or changes in the color 
known as chromogenic colony growth or texture 
(eg. softening) of the product.31 Some common 
routes in which microorganisms enter food products 
include soil, water, established environment, animal 
feeds, animal hides, food handlers, food utilities, air, 
dust, vegetable products and imported and exported 
products.27
Most agricultural products and foods of animal’s 
origin carry a wide range of bacteria. During 
production, processing, packaging, transportation, 
preparation, storage, and service, any food may be 
exposed to bacterial contamination and or microbial 
toxins that may result into mild to severe illnesses.32 
Since it is not possible to produce food with zero 
pathogens, microbiological methods help to ensure 
that manufactured food products are within the 
level of pathogen contamination that provides a 
scientifically acceptable risk.14 Generally, objective 
methods (physical, chemical and microbiological) 
provide a milestone for quality control. In new food 
product development these methods should be well 
implemented and their final results should positively 
reflect the expected quality of the new food products. 
Emphasis should be directed to small scale food 
processing as well as indigenous food production.
Sensory Evaluation Methods  
Sensory evaluation measures the reaction to stimuli 
resulting from the consumption of a food or food 
product.33 34 It is concerned with providing answers 
to questions about product quality and existing 
competitor products as well as questions that 
are most often asked by persons concerned with 
technical, development, research and production; 
not only that but also factory managers, quality 
assurance managers and marketing managers.35 
Normally, the personal preference and powers of 
perception involve the use of sense organs.8
The right answers to sensory questions are 
extremely important for the existence of any food 
product tested as they determine its acceptability 
and provide effective decisions for future product 
success in the market.36 Sensory evaluation helps 
in eliminating or controlling sources of unwanted 
error, which can either be through control of the 
environment, proper experimental design and 
sampling of human subjects to test the products.37 
When conducting sensory analysis on food quality, 
it is imperative to know that there is possibility of 
getting wrong answers, which in turn can risk the 
competition of a particular food product in the market. 
Wrong information on food product could lead to 
miscommunication, improper decisions, wasted 
consumer research, and much more wasted time, 
effort and material costs.8
Panel members form an important tool of sensory 
analysis. Its value depends on the objectivity, 
precision and reproducibility of their judgments. 
Panelists need to be carefully screened, trained, 
calibrated and validated.38 Training enhance 
individual's understanding of sensory attributes 
and hence enable them provide accurate, valid, 
consistent, and standardized sensory measurements 
that can be reproduced. Each panelist must detect, 
recognize, and agree upon the exact connotation of 
each descriptive term.39 The panelists may be guided 

695
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
to ensure consistence in their judgments by using 
reference standards that demonstrate variation in 
specific descriptive terms.9
 
Panelists are given test samples (food product) and 
should state their preferences. The word “preferred” 
can mean most acceptable, tastes best, looks best, 
would buy and the like.38 Consumer responses from 
the product are used to modify the product. The new 
food product can again be tested and where possible 
or necessary, modified further. Sensory analysis can 
therefore play a fundamental role in the management 
of product quality in the food industry.35
Types of Sensory Evaluation Methods 
Discriminative Tests
These tests are designed to determine if a difference 
exists between food products.37 Panelists should 
be knowledgeable about the product in question 
for easy choice. Each member is required to 
make a choice among the given food products. 
Discriminative tests at some point may be used 
for different purposes (eg. determining sample 
differences/ similarities and or quantity of degree 
of difference/similarities).34 To perform these 
tests about 10-50 panelists are recommended. 
Discriminative tests include triangular test, duo-trio 
test and paired-comparison test.  
Triangular Test
In this test, normally three samples are involved 
when determining the overall difference between 
two products. Out of the three samples, two are 
similar and one is dissimilar. The samples must 
be coded with individual three-digit numbers. The 
taster is required to select the sample which is 
different from others. In these tests the chance of 
choosing the required sample correctly is greater. 
It is recommended that no more than six samples 
be evaluated at one testing session because the 
method is liable to fatigue of panelists. The tests 
require fewer tasters, at least 4-8 tasters are 
considered enough to carry single testing.37 40
 
Duo-Trio Tests
This determines whether or not a sensory difference 
exists between two samples. There is always a 
reference sample and two test samples; of the 
two test samples, one sample is identical to the 
reference, and the other one is the test sample.41 
The panel members are asked to identify the sample 
that is similar to reference sample. Duo-trio tests are 
sometimes used instead of triangle tests to compare 
unknown differences between samples, however 
they are considered less efficient than triangle tests. 
At least 7-10 evaluators are recommended.42 40
Paired Comparison Tests
These are applied when a difference in chemical 
composition of the sample which requires a sensory 
assessment is well known. Two differently coded 
samples are presented to each panelist at the 
same time and the task is to choose the sample 
that is perceived higher in the specified sensory 
attribute.43 Tasters are asked to judge the samples 
by comparing them without needing to rate the 
magnitude of the difference, for example, “are the 
two samples identical or different?” or “which of the 
two samples sugary?”.43 Compared to triangular test, 
paired comparison test is less tedious and frequently 
used for strongly flavored or complex products. At 
least 7-10 panelists as for duo-trio are recommended 
in this test.40 43
Descriptive Tests 
In these tests, sensory attributes of products are 
characterized in order of their appearances and 
relative intensities are assigned.37 They provide 
more detailed profiles of a product by identifying 
the different characteristics within the product 
and quantifying them. Descriptive tests are more 
comprehensive and sophisticated as compared to 
discriminative tests.44 They provide the basis for 
mapping product similarities and variances and 
determining those sensory characteristics that are 
important to acceptance. It is normally performed by 
6 to 15 meticulously selected and trained panelists. 
Panelists are trained to evaluate products similar 
to how any instrument would give a reading. 
Descriptive tests include Free Choice Profile (FCP), 
Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA), Flavor 
Profile Analysis (FPA), Texture Profile Analysis (TPF) 
and Time Intensity Analysis (TIA).45
Free Choice Profile
In this method, there is no prior training of the 
panelists, each judge decides his/her own list 
of attributes to label the product. The judge 
should constantly be trained and the response 
computerized, then a time-intensity curve obtained 

696
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
for the determined attribute.  Analysis of variance 
is used to analyze three parameter from the curve, 
namely maximum intensity, the point at which 
maximum is reached, and the first point at which no 
more perception occurs.46
Quantitative Descriptive Analysis
This consists of progressive survey of sensory 
terms for a product generated by a trained sensory 
panelists using nontechnical language. Trained 
judges normally reach a consensus on the relative 
discrepancies between the samples.47 QDA and 
FCP have the same purpose of determining the 
intensities of all product attributes and also defining 
the complete sensory profile. 
 
Flavor Profile Analysis
This is useful for identifying sample taste and odor. 
It is a technique that provides a written record of 
noticeable aroma of a product, flavor and aftertaste 
components. Panelists characterize individual 
aroma and flavor in the order perceived and assign 
a constant rating scale. Normally 4-6 panelists are 
suggested. They independently examine the product 
and record their impression in terms of aroma, flavor 
and aftertaste. Finally report is presented to a panel 
leader in an open discussion.48
Texture profile analysis: This has been widely applied 
to test solid and semisolid food products. Usually it 
involves a panel of 6-9 members; textural attributes 
and other evaluation procedures are established 
unanimously by panel members before carrying out 
the evaluation of the products in question.49 50 TPA is 
convenient for rapid evaluation of food texture which 
is normally measured only by humans. In some 
experiments, liquid samples that cannot keep their 
shape but flow under gravity are poured into a cup 
and subjected to uniaxial compression. 
Then the parameters obtained from uniaxial 
compression are then discussed without considering 
the physical meaning of these parameters namely 
hardness, cohesiveness and adhesiveness.51
Time Intensity Analysis
This is used to estimate the change in intensity of a 
determined characteristic with time. It has the main 
role of determining the intensity of any descriptor 
term in a product with time. TIA and FCP are among 
the descriptive sensory tests mostly used in scientific 
studies and by the food companies.46
Affective/ Consumer Acceptance Tests 
Affective methods are also called subjective 
methods. These are very useful for evaluating food 
acceptability or preference (which product is liked or 
preferred). Normally large number of respondents 
is required (50-150 panelists considered adequate). 
Panelists are not trained but selected based on 
previous use of product, economic social level and 
geographical area.33
Preference Ranking
In this technique, three or more samples are 
rank-ordered with one sample being preferred 
over the other. This type of test supply information 
about people's likes and dislikes of a product and 
determine how various samples differ based on a 
single distinguishing attribute. In consumer analysis, 
the panelists are asked to rank the coded samples 
according to their preference.52
Hedonic Rating Scale
This is among of the widely used sensory evaluation 
methods that measure consumers’ level of liking of 
food products.53 In practice there are 9-point Hedonic 
scale, 7-point Hedonic scale and 5-point Hedonic 
scale. The 9-point Hedonic scale range from “like 
extremely’’ to “dislike extremely’’. Practically, not 
fewer than five points are recommended.34
Some of the Requirements for Sensory Evaluation
There should be clear objective for conducting 
sensory analysis, appropriate area for preparation 
of food samples to be tasted, test procedures which 
should be properly implemented in a way that reduce 
risks to health of participants, good laboratory, 
proper method of sample presentation, sensory 
panel members suitable for evaluation (If training is 
needed, they must be trained), utensils / glass wares 
suitable for different foods to be tested, sophisticated 
sensory booths with controlled temperature 
(20oC – 22oC) and relative humidity at 40 ± 
5%, suitable lighting in booths, right coding of 
samples (usually 3 digit coding is preferred) and 
special software for statistical analysis of sensory 
data.35 54 Sensory evaluation is very crucial in the new 
product development. When properly implemented 
with controls, careful screening of panelists, effective 

697
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
training as well as proper statistical interpretation, 
it can provide many benefits and form a basis on 
which accurate decisions can be made relating to 
the food product in question.55
Table 2: Summary of sensory methods
Question	
Method	
 Types
Are products different?	
Discrimination test	
-Triangle test
   	
 	
-Duo-trio test
    	
	
-Paired comparison test
If products are different, 	
Descriptive tests	
-Quantitative descriptive analysis    
how are they different?    	
	
-Free choice profile
   	
	
-Time intensity analysis
   	
	
-Flavor profile analysis
   	
	
-Texture profile analysis
What is the acceptability of	
Affective/Acceptance	
-Hedonic rating scale (5- Point,  
a product? Is one product	
	
7-Point and 9-Point Hedonic scale)
preferred over another?	
	
-Preference ranking
 
Source: Stone34 Cruz et al46 Rosenthal50 Kemp et al54
Linkage between Objective Evaluation Methods 
and Subjective/Sensory Evaluation
Objective tools use equipment for routine 
quality control, involve physical, chemical and 
microbiological techniques. They are faster and 
more efficient in a way that one can perform the 
test on many samples in a day.8 On the other hand 
subjective/sensory evaluation methods involve the 
use of human subjects by means of their sense 
organs, can determine sensitivity to changes in 
ingredients, processing and packaging hence 
marked crucial for food product development and 
evaluation of market performance of new foods 
or food products.37 38 They are expensive and time 
consuming (for example, it can take almost a day 
to perform a complete sensory analysis of two 
samples only). Sensory evaluation can determine 
the overall acceptability of food or food products 
than can objective tools do.8 Therefore, in order to 
provide reliable information regarding acceptability 
and routine quality control of a particular food or 
food product, objective evaluation methods must be 
linked with sensory evaluation. 
Controlling Food Quality and Safety in Small-
Scale Food Production  
Low compliance to Good Manufacturing and Good 
Hygiene Practices by small scale food producers and 
processors constantly lead to food contamination 
resulting into poor food quality and safety hence 
exposing consumers to risks of foodborne 
diseases.5 56 Small food producers, processors 
and distributors are faced with several challenges 
associated with food supply chain which involves 
stages like sourcing of raw materials, production, 
processing and packaging, storage, wholesale 
distribution and retail redistribution to consumers. 
Disruption of any of the stages would put the whole 
supply chain at risk.57 Small-scale food industry is 
confronted with practical challenges of developing, 
implementing and maintaining food safety and 
quality programs.11 Major problems associated with 
small-scale food production especially in developing 
countries include; lack of right technology, inadequate 
power for industrial operations, poor water supply for 
processing and portable use, lack of traceability, 
failure to control inventory in warehouses and stores, 
inability to maintain the safety and quality of food 
or food products, lack of qualified personnel with 
experience and technical expertise in food safety, 
lack of training, poor equipment layout, lack of 
in-house microbial risk evaluation and insufficient 
funds for maintaining quality standards.57 58 59 
Due to these factors, the hygienic position of facilities 
in small-scale food production and processing is 
generally low and pose a great public health risk to 

698
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
consumers. It is therefore necessary to address food 
quality and safety challenges faced by small-scale 
businesses by good planning and risk assessment, 
regular trainings and routine observation of quality 
standards.57 56 It has to be remembered that, an 
efficient food supply chain not only ensure quality 
of food products but also maintain customers for the 
particular food or food products. 
Global Application of Objective Methods and 
Sensory Evaluation in Quality Control of Food 
Products
Globally, physical, chemical, microbiological 
and sensory evaluation methods are among the 
analytical procedures used to provide informed 
features on diverse food products (eg. composition, 
physicochemical properties and sensory qualities). 
Such information enhances the ability of most food 
companies/ industries to economically produce 
foods that are constantly safe, nutritious and suitable 
for consumers.36 However, current findings indicate 
that these methods are underutilized in a wide 
range of food industries/ companies particularly 
under small scale production. For example, in 
most African countries application of quality 
assessment and sensory evaluation methods in 
product development is still a big challenge. This is 
reflected by a wide range of unsafe foods available 
in the local markets across the region. Most 
foods used are subject to hazards and microbial 
contamination, including mycotoxins which in turn 
represent serious threats to human health within 
the continent.60 61 Problems occur as a result of 
poor postharvest handling practices. Not only that 
but also inadequate or absence of facilities such 
as storage facilities (eg. cold stores), and transport 
facilities increase microbial contamination and food 
loss.59 Poor delivery of quality food products is also 
contributed by low access to modern equipment 
and inappropriate packaging materials as well as 
low quality of raw materials by small-scale food 
processing enterprises.5 Therefore authorities 
responsible for quality control and food safety 
management at the national level are given an alert 
that they still have a lot to do in ensuring quality and 
safety of foods towards safeguarding consumer’s 
health.
Challenges Facing Food Control Authorities In 
Developing Countries
According to FAO/WHO,56 some of the challenges 
that food control authorities still encounter are:
•	
Increasing burden of food-related illness and 
emerging foodborne hazards.
•	
Changes in technological advancement in food 
production, processing and marketing.
•	
Problems to food processors as related to timely 
delivery of raw materials.
•	
Lack of trained analytical staff in most of food 
control laboratories impedes quality standards.
•	
Need for harmonization of food safety and 
quality standards globally.
•	
Rapid urbanization and increasing consumer 
awareness about food safety and quality issues. 
These influence changes in lifestyle. 
 
Strategies to be Implemented at The National 
Level to Ensure Food Safety and Quality Control
Attainment of food control system at the national 
level requires consideration of current or emerging 
food safety and quality issues. 
•	
Effective quality control should be focused 
on the following crucial areas; the factory 
building; machinery and equipment design and 
installation; manufacturing system; process and 
product identification; product design; raw and 
ingredient materials and packaging materials, 
and the market through intensive consumer 
response program which can provide the 
required feedback.  
•	
Appropriate and consistent training of food 
inspectors should be compulsory. They must 
be well trained to understand the industrial 
processes, identification of potential safety and 
quality problems, and have all the required skills 
to inspect the premises, collect food samples 
and carry out general assessment. The food 
inspectors should also be well trained and 
equipped with Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points (HACCPs) and handle HACCP 
audit responsibilities. 
•	
Routine hygienic control of street foods should 

699
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
be observed, these foods are mostly prepared 
and retailed under unclean environments.
•	
Control measures should mostly focus on 
training of food producers, shippers, processors, 
distributors and handlers in hygiene practices to 
improve safety of particular foods.
•	
Governments should effectively support small 
food processing units so that they absorb 
better technology and finally deliver quality 
food products. 
•	
The Food Control Management should lay 
down the standards for food control laboratories 
and regularly monitor their performance. 
Additionally, food control agencies should 
prioritize and promote the specific requirements 
for the training of their food inspectors and 
laboratory analysts.
•	
The need for Quality Management Systems 
(QMS) involving farmers, processors, handlers 
and traders is imperative. Sound measures 
should address Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP), 
Good manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good 
Transportation Practices and Good Storage 
Practices (GSP).
Conclusion 	
Objective tools (physical, chemical and 
microbiological tests) and sensory /consumer 
evaluation are very significant in new product 
development as they ensure food product quality and 
safety. Product manufacturers and service industries/
companies require persistent and committed efforts 
for enhancement of products and service quality. 
This will maintain constant acceptability of the 
new food products and hence competition in the 
local and global markets. Consumer acceptance 
mainly determines the sensory quality of products, 
therefore sensory evaluation should always go hand 
in hand with instrumental analysis in laboratories 
and food manufacturing companies. It is also 
important to have specialized professionals within 
food industries/companies, who can help avoiding 
the use of wrong sensory results which in turn may 
threaten the success of the particular food or food 
products during marketing.  
Acknowledgement
The Author is grateful to all who made this work 
comprehensive.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that, they have no conflict of 
interest. 
References
1. 	
Burlingame B, Pineiro M. The essential 
balance: Risks and benefits in food safety 
and quality. J Food Compos Anal. 2007; 20: 
139-146 
2. 	
Hedberg CW. Food safety. In Occupational 
and Environmental Health. Minnesota, US: 
Oxford University Press; 2017: 381-392 
3. 	
Kuesten CL. New Food Product Development: 
From Concept to Marketplace. J Prod Innov 
Manag. 2006; 23:191-199
4. 	
Vasconcellos JA. Quality Assurance for the 
Food Industry a Practical Approach. Boca 
Raton, Florida: CRC Press LLC; 2003
5. 	
Mukantwali C, Laswai H, Tiisekwa B, 
Wiehler S.  Good Manufacturing and 
Hygienic Practices at Small and Medium 
Scale Pineapple Processing Enterprises in 
Rwanda. Food Sci and Qual Management. 
2013; 13:15-30
6. 	
Fuller GW. New Food Product Development, 
from Concept to Market Place, Second 
Edition. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 
2004
7. 	
Sharabi M, Davidow M. Service quality 
implementation: problems and solutions. 
Int J Qual Serv Sci. 2010; 2(2):189-205
8. 	
Singham P, Birwal P, Yadav BK. Importance 
of Objective and Subjective Measurement 
of Food Quality and their Inter-relationship. 
J Food Process Technol. 2015; 6(9):1-7 
9. 	
Fuller GW. What Is New Food Product 
Development? In New Food Product 
Development. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC 
Press Taylor and Francis Group, LLC; 2011

700
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
10. 	
Marire MI, Nwankwo BE, Agbor NS. 
The Problems of Quality Control in the 
Manufacturing Sector, a Study of Nigeria 
Breweries Plc, Enugu. IOSR J Bus Manag. 
2014; 16(12):96-107
11.  	
Giovannucci D and Satin M. Food Quality 
Issues: Understanding HACCP and Other 
Quality Management Techniques, A Guide 
to Developing Agricultural Markets and 
Agro-enterprises. 2007; http://ssrn.com/
abstract=996762  
12. 	
Wilhelm, Luther R., Dwayne A. Suter, et al. 
Physical Properties of Food Materials. In: 
Food & Process Engineering Technology. 
2013
13. 	
Boldor D. Physical Properties of Foods. J 
Food Process Preserv. 2007; 31(1)
14. 	
Nielsen SS. Food Analysis Fourth Edition. 
New York, USA: Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC; 2010 
15. 	
Jaishankar M, Tseten T, Anbalagan N, 
Mathew BB, Beeregowda KN. Toxicity, 
mechanism and health effects of some heavy 
metals. Interdiscip Toxicol. 2014; 7(2): 60-72
16.         WHO. WHO _ Food safety. Fact Sheets 
2018. doi:/entity/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs399/en/index.html
17. 	
Martin S, Griswold W. Human Health Effects 
of Heavy Metals: Center for Hazardous 
Substance Research: Briefs for Citizens. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2009; 15:1-6
18. 	
WHO. Exposure to Dioxins and Dioxin-like 
Substances: a Major Public Health Concern. 
Prev Dis Through Heal Environ. 2010
19. 	
Van den Berg M, Kypke K, Kotz A, et al. WHO/
UNEP global surveys of PCDDs, PCDFs, 
PCBs and DDTs in human milk and benefit–
risk evaluation of breastfeeding. Arch Toxicol. 
2017; 91(1):83-96 
20. 	
Muzembo BA, Iwai-Shimada M, Isobe T, 
et al., Dioxins levels in human blood after 
implementation of measures against dioxin 
exposure in Japan. Environ Health Prev Med. 
2019
21. 	
Duruibe, JO, Ogwuegbu MOC, Egwurugwu 
JN. Heavy metal pollution and human biotoxic 
effects. Int J Phys Sci. 2007; 2(5):112-118 
22. 	
Nagajyoti PC, Lee KD, Sreekanth TVM. 
Heavy metals, occurrence and toxicity 
for plants: A review. Environ Chem Lett. 
2010; 8(3): 199-216
23.	
Jan AT, Azam M, Siddiqui K et al. Heavy 
Metals and Human Health: Mechanistic 
Insight into Toxicity and Counter Defense 
System of Antioxidants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 
16: 29592-29630
24. 	
Snyder JW, Atlas RM. Handbook of Media for 
Clinical Microbiology. CRC Press: 2006
25. 	
Jay MM, Loessner MJ, Golden DA. Modern 
Food Microbiology. Mod Food Microbiol SE 
- 18. 2005
26.  	 World Health Organization. Five Keys to Safer 
Food Manual. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO 
Press; 2006 
27. 	
Behling RG, Eifert J, Erickson MC, et 
al. Selected Pathogens of Concern to 
Industrial Food Processors: Infectious, 
Toxigenic, Toxico-Infectious, Selected 
Emerging Pathogenic Bacteria. In Principles 
of Microbiological Troubleshooting in the 
Industrial Food Processing Environment. 
2010. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-5518-0_2
28. 	
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC). Multistate outbreak of Salmonella 
typhimurium infections associated with eating 
ground beef-United States, 2004. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006.
29. 	
Konkel ME, Monteville MR, Rivera-
Amill V, Joens LA. The pathogenesis of 
Campylobacter jejuni-mediated enteritis. Curr 
Issues Intest Microbiol. 2001; 2(2):55-71 
30. 	
Tribst AAL, Sant’Ana AS, De Massaguer 
PR. Review: Microbiological quality and 
safety of fruit juices--past, present and 
future perspectives. Crit Rev Microb. 2009; 
35(4):310-39  
31. 	
Jay JM. Modern Food Microbiology; 2012
32. 	
Akanele AE, Chukwu S, Ahudie C. 
Microbiological Contamination of Food: The 
Mechanisms, Impacts and Prevention. Int J 
Sci Technol Res. 2016; 5(3):65-78
33. 	
Meilgaard M, Civille G, Carr B. Sensory 
Evaluation Techniques, Fourth Edition. 2014. 
https://doi.org/10.1201/b16452 
34. 	
Stone H. Sensory Evaluation Practices. 2012. 
doi:10.1016/C2009-0-63404-8
35. 	
Mason RL, Nottingham SM. Sensory 
Evaluation. Practical workshop manual 
presented for personnel at Naresuan 
University, Phitsanulok, Thailand in July, 2002

701
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
36. 	
De Pelsmaeker S, Gellynck X, Delbaere C, 
Declercq N, Dewettinck K. Consumer-driven 
product development and improvement 
combined with sensory analysis: A case-
study for European filled chocolates. 
Food Qual Prefer. 2015. doi:10.1016/j.
foodqual.2014.10.009
37. 	
Valentin D, Pecher C, Nguyen DH, Chambers 
D, Abdi H. Integrating sensory evaluation to 
product development. An Asian Perspective. 
Proceedings of SPISE 2012 Summer 
Program in Sensory Evaluation 2012 3rd 
International Symposium. July 24-26, 2012; 
Ho Chi Minh-City, Vietnam 
38. 	
Singh-Ackbarali D, Maharaj R. Sensory 
Evaluation as a Tool in Determining 
Acceptability of Innovative Products 
Developed by Undergraduate Students 
in Food Science and Technology at The 
University of Trinidad and Tobago. J Curric 
Teach. 2014; 3(1):10-27 
39. 	
Poste L, Mackie D, Butler G, Larmond E. 
Laboratory methods for sensory analysis 
of food: Part 2. Nippon Shokuhin Kagaku 
Kogaku Kaishi. 2011; 48(5):378-385 
40. 	
Lawless HT, Heymann H. Discrimination 
Testing. In Sensory Evaluation of Food. 2010. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6488-5_4
41. 	
Lee HS, Kim KO. Difference test sensitivity: 
Comparison of three versions of the duo-trio 
method requiring different memory schemes 
and taste sequences. Food Qual Prefer. 
2008; 19(1): 97-102
42. 	
Purcell S. Duo-Trio. In Discrimination Testing 
in Sensory Science: A Practical Handbook. 
Woodhead Publishing; 2017
43. 	
Yang Q, May Lee Ng. Paired Comparison/
Directional Difference Test/2-Alternative 
Forced Choice (2-AFC) Test, Simple 
Difference Test/Same-Different Test. In 
Discrimination Testing in Sensory Science: 
A Practical Handbook. 2017. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-08-101009-9.00005-8
44. 	
Pimentel TC, Gomes da Cruz A, Deliza R. 
Sensory Evaluation: Sensory Rating and 
Scoring Methods. In Encyclopedia of Food 
and Health. 2015. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-
384947-2.00617-6
45. 	
Meilgaard M, Civille G, Carr B. Descriptive 
Analysis Techniques. In Sensory Evaluation 
Techniques, Fourth Edition. 2014. 
doi:10.1201/b16452-11
46. 	
Cruz AG, Cadena RS, Walter EHM, et al. 
Sensory analysis: Relevance for prebiotic, 
probiotic, and synbiotic product development. 
Compr Rev Food Sci Food Saf. 2010; 9:358-
373.
47. 	
Stone H, Sidel JL. Sensory Evaluation 
Practices: Third Edition. 2004. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-12-672690-9.X5000-8
48. 	
Curren J, Snyder CL, Abraham S, Suffet 
IH. Comparison of two standard odor 
intensity evaluation methods for odor 
problems in air or water. Water Sci Technol. 
2014; 69(1):142-146 
49. 	
Mochizuki Y. Texture Profile Analysis. In: 
Handbook of Food Analytical Chemistry. ; 
2005. doi:10.1002/0471709085.ch26
50. 	
Rosenthal AJ. Texture profile analysis - How 
important are the parameters? J Texture 
Stud. 2010; 41: 672-684
51. 	
Nishinari K, Kohyama K, Kumagai H, Funami 
T, Bourne MC. Parameters of Texture Profile 
Analysis. Food Sci Technol Res. 2013; 
19(3):519-521 
52. 	
Hein KA, Jaeger SR, Tom Carr B, Delahunty 
CM. Comparison of five common acceptance 
and preference methods. Food Qual Prefer. 
2008; 19(7): 651-661
53. 	
Lawless HT, Heymann H. Sensory Evaluation 
of Food. 2010. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-
6488-5
54. 	
Kemp SE, Hollowood T, Hort J. Sensory 
Evaluation: A Practical Handbook. 2013. 
doi:10.1002/9781118688076
55. 	
Drake MA. Invited Review: Sensory 
Analysis of Dairy Foods. J Dairy Sci. 
2007; 90:4925-4937  
56. 	
FAO/WHO. Assuring Food Safety and 
Quality. Guidelines for Strengthening National 
Food Control Systems: FAO Food Nutr Pap 
76; 2003.  
57. 	
Fellows P, Axtell B, Dillon M. Quality assurance 
for small-scale rural food industries. FAO 
Agricultural Services Bulletin No.117; 2011: 
1-133
58. 	
Henson and Humphrey. The Impacts of 
Private Food Safety Standards on the Food 
Chain and on Public Standard-Setting 
Processes, FAO/WHO; 2009

702
MIHAFU et al., Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour., Vol. 8(3) 690-702 (2020)
59. 	
Uzoejinwa BB, Ani AO, Abada UC, Ugwuishiwu 
BO, Ohagwu CJ, Nwakaire JN. Small-scale 
food processing enterprises: measures for 
national development and addressing food 
security challenges in Nigeria. Inter J Sci Tech 
Res Engin (IJSTRE). 2016; 1(5): 72-82
60. 	
Gnonlonfin GJB, Hell K, Adjovi Y, et al. 
A Review on Aflatoxin Contamination and Its 
Implications in the Developing World: A Sub-
Saharan African Perspective. Crit Rev Food 
Sci Nutr. 2013; 53(4):349-365 
61. 	
Darwish WS, Ikenaka Y, Nakayama SMM, 
Ishizuka M. An Overview on Mycotoxin 
Contamination of Foods in Africa. J Vet Med 
Sci. 2014; 76(6):789-97 
