	  
	  
	  
Royal	  Society	  of	  Chemistry	  
	  
Coffee:	  Chemistry,	  Quality	  and	  Health	  Implications	  	  
	  
CHAPTER	  5.6	  
	  
	  Coffee	  in	  the	  Development,	  Progression	  and	  Management	  of	  Type	  2	  Diabetes	  
	  
Heidi	  Virtanena,	  Rogerio	  Nogueira	  Soaresa,	  Jane	  Shearera,b*	  
	  
aFaculty	  of	  Kinesiology;	  bDepartment	  of	  Biochemistry	  &	  Molecular	  Biology,	  Cumming	  School	  of	  
Medicine.,	  University	  of	  Calgary,	  Calgary,	  Alberta,	  CANADA	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
*Corresponding	  Author:	  Jane	  Shearer.	  Email:	  	  jshearer@ucalgary.ca	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
2	  
Abstract	  
The	  global	  incidence	  of	  diabetes	  has	  reached	  epidemic	  proportions	  with	  an	  estimated	  9%	  of	  
adults	  over	  18	  years	  having	  some	  form	  of	  the	  disease.	  Approximately	  90%	  of	  these	  cases	  will	  be	  
due	  to	  type	  2	  diabetes	  (T2D)	  characterized	  by	  hyperglycaemia	  and	  impaired	  insulin	  action.	  	  
Given	  this,	  cost-­‐effective	  lifestyle	  strategies	  to	  prevent	  disease	  onset	  and	  progression	  are	  
imperative.	  	  One	  such	  intervention	  is	  coffee	  consumption.	  	  Chronic	  coffee	  consumption	  dose-­‐
dependently	  reduces	  the	  risk	  of	  T2D	  and	  its	  associated	  comorbidities	  including	  obesity	  and	  the	  
metabolic	  syndrome.	  Compared	  to	  non-­‐consumers,	  1	  cup	  per	  day	  is	  associated	  with	  a	  risk	  
reduction	  of	  ~0.92,	  while	  high	  levels	  (6	  cups	  per	  day)	  results	  in	  a	  risk	  reduction	  of	  ~0.67	  for	  T2D,	  
a	  level	  that	  far	  exceeds	  many	  other	  known	  interventions.	  This	  relation	  is	  independent	  of	  ethnicity,	  
age,	  sex,	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  genetic	  factors	  predisposing	  an	  individual	  to	  consume	  coffee.	  
Coffee	  may	  also	  reduce	  the	  severity	  of	  diabetes	  symptoms	  early	  in	  the	  course	  of	  the	  disease.	  	  This	  
review	  considers	  these	  relationships	  and	  the	  potential	  mechanisms	  by	  which	  chronic	  coffee	  
consumption	  is	  protective.	  	  As	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  T2D	  reduction	  has	  been	  shown	  for	  both	  
caffeinated	  and	  decaffeinated	  coffee,	  non-­‐caffeine	  components	  of	  the	  coffee	  bean	  are	  likely	  
responsible.	  	  
	  
	  (197	  words)	  
	  
Keywords:	  	  Type	  2	  Diabetes,	  Insulin	  Resistance,	  Prevention,	  Caffeine,	  Mechanism(s)	  

	  
3	  
5.6.1	  	  	  	  Introduction	  
According	  to	  the	  World	  Health	  Organization,	  the	  global	  incidence	  of	  diabetes	  has	  reached	  
epidemic	  proportions	  with	  an	  estimated	  9%	  of	  adults	  over	  18	  years	  of	  age	  having	  some	  form	  of	  
the	  disease.1	  This	  number	  translates	  into	  1.5	  million	  deaths	  directly	  attributable	  to	  the	  disease,	  
the	  majority	  in	  low	  and	  middle-­‐income	  countries.	  Approximately	  90%	  of	  these	  cases	  will	  be	  due	  
to	  type	  2	  diabetes	  characterized	  by	  hyperglycaemia	  and	  impaired	  insulin	  action.	  The	  health	  risks	  
and	  complications	  of	  diabetes	  are	  well	  known	  and	  include	  cardiovascular	  disease,	  blindness,	  
amputation	  and	  kidney	  failure.	  Given	  these	  statistics	  and	  the	  significant	  strain	  type	  2	  diabetes	  
places	  on	  health	  care	  budgets,	  finding	  effective	  prevention	  and	  treatment	  strategies	  is	  imperative.	  	  	  
Over	  the	  past	  decade,	  a	  strong	  association	  between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  has	  emerged.	  Coffee	  is	  one	  of	  the	  most	  widely	  consumed	  beverages	  in	  the	  world.	  	  
Derived	  from	  the	  Coffea	  genus,	  coffee	  contains	  thousands	  of	  biologically	  active	  compounds	  
including	  lipids,	  caffeine,	  minerals,	  and	  antioxidants.	  Roasting	  further	  increases	  this	  complexity;	  
producing	  many	  compounds	  unique	  to	  coffee	  and	  not	  found	  in	  other	  foods	  and	  beverages.	  The	  
beverage	  is	  widely	  available,	  relatively	  inexpensive	  and	  the	  majority	  of	  adults	  enjoy	  consuming	  
the	  beverage.	  From	  a	  clinical	  perspective,	  it	  is	  perhaps	  the	  most	  effective,	  modifiable	  lifestyle	  
factor	  proven	  to	  reduce	  the	  incidence	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  found	  to	  date.	  A	  2014	  meta-­‐analysis	  by	  
Ding	  et	  al.	  2	  of	  1,109,	  272	  study	  participants	  and	  45,335	  cases	  with	  a	  follow-­‐up	  between	  10	  
months	  and	  20	  years	  showed	  that	  compared	  to	  no	  or	  very	  little	  coffee	  consumption,	  coffee	  dose	  
dependently	  reduces	  the	  risk	  of	  the	  disease.	  	  Relative	  risk	  reductions	  are	  0.92,	  0.85,	  0.79,	  0.75,	  
0.71	  and	  0.67	  for	  1-­‐6	  cups	  of	  coffee	  per	  day	  respectively.2	  This	  relation	  exists	  across	  the	  globe,	  in	  
multiple	  ethnicities,	  is	  independent	  of	  age	  (young	  and	  old	  adults)3,	  sex	  4	  and	  socioeconomic	  
status.3	  A	  similar	  meta-­‐analysis	  of	  prospective	  cohort	  studies	  on	  caffeine,	  coffee,	  and	  type	  2	  

	  
4	  
diabetes	  confirmed	  these	  findings	  but	  also	  showed	  the	  strongest	  associations	  in	  women,	  non-­‐
smokers,	  and	  those	  with	  a	  body	  mass	  index	  under	  25kg/m².5	  	  	  
As	  the	  method	  of	  coffee	  preparation	  can	  affect	  its	  composition,	  investigations	  have	  also	  
focused	  on	  whether	  specific	  methods	  of	  preparation	  or	  coffee	  additives	  alter	  its	  protective	  effects	  
against	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  	  There	  appears	  to	  be	  no	  impact	  of	  the	  method	  of	  preparation	  (filtered,	  
instant,	  press,	  pot,	  espresso),	  type	  (decaffeinated,	  caffeine	  containing)2,	  the	  use	  of	  additives	  (milk,	  
cream,	  sugar	  or	  sweetener).3	  The	  only	  variables	  that	  appear	  to	  matter	  in	  considering	  the	  positive	  
effects	  of	  the	  beverage	  on	  type	  2	  diabetes	  is	  the	  volume	  and	  frequency	  of	  consumption.2	  Other	  
provocative	  questions	  warranting	  consideration	  are	  as	  follows:	  Is	  coffee	  effective	  in	  just	  
preventing	  type	  2	  diabetes	  risk	  or	  is	  it	  effective	  at	  all	  stages	  of	  disease	  including	  disease	  progression	  
and	  management	  once	  it	  has	  become	  established?	  Likewise,	  is	  coffee	  protective	  against	  other	  
related	  metabolic	  disease	  states	  involving	  insulin	  resistance	  including	  obesity	  and	  the	  metabolic	  
syndrome?	  What	  physiological	  or	  biochemical	  mechanism(s)	  are	  involved	  in	  mediating	  coffee’s	  
protective	  effects?	  These	  questions	  are	  the	  basis	  of	  this	  chapter	  exploring	  the	  inverse	  relation	  
between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  Lastly,	  we	  will	  briefly	  discuss	  the	  caffeine-­‐
coffee	  paradox.	  While	  coffee	  is	  clearly	  protective	  against	  the	  disease,	  acute	  caffeine	  consumption	  
(in	  coffee,	  energy	  drinks	  and	  other	  formats)	  appears	  to	  cause	  transient	  glucose	  intolerance,	  an	  
effect	  that	  would	  be	  expected	  to	  promote	  rather	  than	  prevent	  the	  disease.	  	  	  
	  
5.6.1.1	  Coffee	  and	  Type	  2	  Diabetes	  Risk	  
	  
As	  previously	  mentioned,	  the	  relationship	  between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  risk	  is	  well	  documented	  in	  prospective,	  cohort	  and	  case-­‐control	  studies.2,	  5	  However,	  
much	  of	  this	  data	  is	  just	  such,	  a	  relationship	  wherein	  more	  coffee	  consumed	  results	  in	  a	  reduction	  
in	  disease	  –	  there	  is	  little	  data	  to	  support	  direct	  causation.	  Therefore,	  questions	  as	  to	  whether	  

	  
5	  
genetically	  high	  coffee	  intake	  alone	  is	  simply	  associated	  with	  lower	  risk	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  have	  
arisen.	  An	  individual’s	  preference,	  sensitivity	  and	  metabolism	  of	  coffee	  and	  caffeine	  are	  
determined	  in	  part	  by	  their	  genetics6-­‐8	  According	  to	  Griffiths	  et	  al.	  9	  some	  individuals	  can	  
accurately	  discriminate	  as	  little	  as	  10	  mg	  of	  caffeine	  while	  others	  require	  ten	  times	  this	  dose	  or	  
100	  mg	  to	  detect	  the	  drug.	  This	  is	  also	  reflected	  by	  numerous	  reports	  of	  responders	  and	  non-­‐
responders	  to	  caffeine	  in	  the	  literature.10-­‐13	  The	  heritability	  for	  caffeine-­‐induced	  traits	  has	  been	  
found	  to	  be	  relatively	  stable	  over	  the	  lifetime	  of	  individuals.14	  Variation	  in	  adenosine	  receptors	  
(caffeine	  is	  a	  non-­‐specific	  adenosine	  receptor	  antagonist),	  dopamine	  receptors	  and	  the	  liver	  
cytochrome	  P450,	  CYP1A2	  (accounting	  for	  95%	  of	  caffeine	  metabolism	  by	  the	  liver),	  all	  impact	  an	  
individual’s	  response	  to	  caffeine.7,	  15,	  16	  For	  example,	  there	  is	  evidence	  that	  caffeine	  can	  be	  
detrimental	  to	  cardiovascular	  risk,	  but	  only	  in	  individuals	  who	  are	  slow	  metabolizers	  (CYP	  
1A2/1F	  variant,	  present	  in	  ~58%	  of	  the	  population)17.	  As	  such,	  understanding	  the	  relationship	  
between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  genetic	  variance	  is	  an	  important	  consideration	  in	  the	  
assessment	  of	  diet-­‐disease	  associations.	  	  
	  
Whether	  individuals	  who	  are	  slow	  to	  metabolize	  caffeine	  are	  more	  prone	  to	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  is	  an	  interesting	  question.	  Slow	  metabolizing	  individuals	  would	  have	  higher	  levels	  of	  
circulating	  caffeine	  for	  a	  given	  dose	  of	  coffee/caffeine	  compared	  to	  a	  fast	  metabolizer.	  This	  
difference	  also	  likely	  explains	  why	  slower	  metabolizing	  individuals	  drink	  less.18	  To	  answer	  the	  
question	  of	  whether	  having	  a	  genotypic	  preference	  for	  caffeine	  and/or	  coffee	  consumption	  is	  
protective	  towards	  diabetes	  development	  itself,	  Nordestgaaed	  and	  colleagues19	  conducted	  a	  
Mendelian	  randomization	  analysis.	  This	  analysis	  assumes	  that	  a	  genetic	  predisposition	  for	  high	  
coffee	  intake	  would	  be	  associated	  with	  a	  lower	  risk	  of	  obesity,	  type	  2	  diabetes	  and	  the	  metabolic	  
syndrome.	  In	  other	  words,	  this	  study	  examined	  associations	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  naturally	  
randomized	  genes	  of	  interest	  to	  determine	  if	  genetics	  alone	  could	  explain	  the	  effects	  of	  coffee	  

	  
6	  
consumption	  on	  lowering	  type	  2	  diabetes	  risk.	  Two	  large	  population	  cohorts	  consisting	  of	  93,179	  
individuals	  were	  examined	  for	  five	  genetic	  variants	  or	  single	  nucleotide	  polymorphisms	  
(SNPs)(rs4410790,	  rs6968865,	  rs2470893,	  rs2472297	  	  and	  rs2472299)	  for	  coffee/caffeine	  
related	  variants	  in	  relation	  to	  both	  their	  coffee	  intake	  as	  well	  as	  their	  body	  mass	  index,	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  and	  metabolic	  syndrome	  prevalence.	  These	  genetic	  variants	  have	  been	  previously	  
associated	  with	  coffee	  or	  caffeine	  intake6,	  20-­‐22	  and	  are	  shown	  in	  Table	  1	  along	  with	  their	  global	  
minor	  allele	  frequency	  with	  other	  SNPs	  of	  interest.	  Predicted	  associations	  were	  then	  examined	  
on	  a	  separate	  validation	  cohort	  consisting	  of	  78,	  021	  individuals.	  Results	  demonstrated	  that	  
genetically	  derived	  high	  coffee	  intake	  was	  not	  associated	  with	  obesity,	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  the	  
metabolic	  syndrome	  or	  any	  other	  risk	  variable	  including	  blood	  pressure,	  cholesterol,	  fasting	  
glucose	  levels,	  triglycerides	  and	  waist	  circumference	  among	  others.	  	  
	  
[INSERT	  TABLE	  1	  NEAR	  HERE]	  
	  
While	  this	  type	  of	  analysis	  did	  not	  support	  the	  initial	  conclusion	  that	  individuals	  	  
genetic	  predisposed	  for	  high	  coffee/caffeine	  intake	  would	  be	  associated	  with	  a	  lower	  disease	  
risk;	  the	  analysis	  did	  confirm	  two	  previously	  known	  conclusions	  with	  a	  large	  and	  comprehensive	  
dataset.	  	  First,	  when	  individuals	  were	  segregated	  according	  to	  genotype;	  with	  individuals	  being	  
classified	  according	  to	  the	  selected	  SNPs,	  results	  showed	  that	  when	  compared	  to	  individuals	  with	  
no	  or	  few	  caffeine/coffee	  traits,	  those	  with	  the	  highest	  number	  of	  traits	  consumed	  on	  average	  
0.68	  more	  cups	  of	  coffee	  per	  day.19	  	  Second,	  data	  confirmed	  a	  dose	  dependent	  reduction	  for	  type	  
2	  diabetes	  with	  hazard	  ratios	  of	  0.70	  (95%	  CI	  0.54-­‐0.91)	  with	  0.1	  to	  1.0	  cups	  per	  day;	  0.48	  (0.35-­‐
0.67)	  with	  4.1-­‐5	  cups	  per	  day	  and	  0.57	  (0.42-­‐0.78)	  with	  >5	  cups	  per	  day	  compared	  to	  non-­‐
consumers.	  This	  level	  of	  risk	  reduction	  is	  in	  line	  with	  previous	  meta-­‐analyses.2	  	  Smaller	  effect	  

	  
7	  
sizes	  were	  also	  observed	  for	  the	  metabolic	  syndrome	  with	  odds	  ratios	  ranging	  from	  0.91	  to	  0.83	  
and	  from	  no	  change	  1.02	  to	  0.82	  for	  obesity.	  These	  relationships	  have	  been	  re-­‐plotted	  on	  the	  
same	  graph	  for	  comparison	  purposes	  (Figure	  1).	  	  Of	  note,	  there	  is	  a	  dose-­‐dependent	  decline	  with	  
increasing	  coffee	  consumption	  for	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  In	  contrast,	  there	  is	  a	  slight	  increase	  in	  risk	  of	  
both	  obesity	  and	  the	  metabolic	  syndrome	  at	  the	  highest	  levels	  of	  coffee	  consumption.	  	  While	  
these	  three	  conditions;	  obesity,	  type	  2	  diabetes	  and	  the	  metabolic	  syndrome	  can’t	  be	  considered	  
independent	  conditions,	  it	  is	  interesting	  to	  note	  that	  very	  high	  coffee	  consumption	  no	  longer	  
appears	  to	  be	  protective	  at	  very	  high	  levels	  (>5	  cups	  per	  day)	  for	  obesity	  and	  the	  metabolic	  
syndrome.	  	  This	  slight	  increase	  may	  be	  due	  to	  a	  clustering	  of	  ill-­‐health	  behaviours	  that	  can	  
accompany	  excessive	  coffee	  consumption	  including	  low	  levels	  of	  exercise,	  the	  consumption	  of	  
fatty	  foods,	  alcohol	  and	  smoking.19	  	  
	  
[INSERT	  FIGURE	  1	  NEAR	  HERE]	  
	  
5.6.1.2	  Coffee	  and	  Diabetes	  Progression	  	  
While	  data	  on	  coffee	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes	  risk	  reduction	  is	  abundant	  within	  the	  literature,	  
relatively	  few	  studies	  examine	  the	  relationship	  between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  newly	  
diagnosed	  diabetes.	  Yarmolinsky	  and	  colleagues3	  assessed	  coffee	  intake	  in	  relation	  to	  a	  number	  
of	  diabetes	  related	  parameters	  in	  newly	  diagnosed	  individuals	  including	  fasting	  glucose,	  the	  2-­‐
hour	  75	  g	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test	  (OGTT),	  fasting	  and	  post-­‐OGTT	  insulin	  (standard	  measures	  
of	  both	  whole	  body	  glucose	  disposal	  and	  insulin	  sensitivity).	  	  After	  adjustment	  for	  covariates,	  
results	  of	  this	  study	  demonstrates	  that	  those	  consuming	  coffee	  2-­‐3	  times	  per	  day	  and	  >3	  times	  
per	  day	  were	  at	  23%	  and	  26%	  lower	  odds	  of	  newly	  diagnosed	  diabetes	  compared	  to	  those	  
reporting	  no	  consumption.	  Coffee	  consumption	  was	  also	  related	  to	  lower	  levels	  of	  impaired	  

	  
8	  
glucose	  tolerance,	  2h	  post-­‐OGTT	  insulin	  and	  glucose	  (>11.1	  mmol/L)	  levels	  and	  a	  lower	  
composite	  insulin	  sensitivity	  index	  as	  defined	  by	  DeFronzo	  and	  Matsuda.23	  However,	  no	  
differences	  were	  noted	  in	  other	  parameters	  including	  fasting	  glucose	  (>7.0	  mmol/L),	  percent	  
glycated	  hemoglobin	  (HbA1c),	  fasting	  insulin,	  the	  homeostatic	  model	  of	  assessment	  for	  both	  
insulin	  resistance	  (HOMA-­‐IR)	  and	  β-­‐cell	  function	  (HOMA-­‐β).	  	  Of	  interest,	  the	  lack	  of	  response	  for	  
HbA1c	  ,	  the	  most	  commonly	  used	  	  measure	  of	  glucose	  control	  did	  not	  change	  with	  coffee	  
consumption	  in	  this	  group.	  	  	  	  
This	  is	  consistent	  with	  another	  report	  by	  Smith	  and	  colleagues24	  examining	  the	  
relationship	  between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  in	  healthy	  individuals	  and	  
those	  with	  impaired	  glucose	  tolerance.	  Impaired	  glucose	  tolerance	  (fasting	  plasma	  glucose	  <	  6.1	  
mmol/L	  and	  7.8	  mmol/L	  ≤	  post	  challenge	  glucose	  ≤	  11.1	  mmol/L)	  is	  an	  early	  stage	  of	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  or	  pre-­‐diabetes.	  A	  total	  of	  910	  adults	  (aged	  >50	  years)	  were	  followed	  for	  ~8	  years.	  
Follow-­‐up	  identified	  317	  participants	  with	  impaired	  glucose	  tolerance	  –	  of	  these,	  those	  who	  were	  
past	  or	  current	  coffee	  drinkers	  were	  at	  reduced	  risk	  for	  incident	  diabetes	  with	  odds	  reductions	  of	  
0.31	  and	  0.36	  respectively.	  These	  results	  were	  adjusted	  for	  sex,	  age,	  physical	  activity,	  body	  mass	  
index,	  smoking,	  alcohol,	  hypertension,	  and	  baseline	  fasting	  plasma	  glucose.	  Together,	  these	  
results	  suggest	  that	  coffee	  consumption	  can	  reduce	  the	  severity	  of	  newly	  diagnosed	  diabetes	  and	  
well	  as	  the	  progression	  from	  glucose	  intolerance	  to	  more	  severe	  disease.	  Despite	  this,	  coffee	  
consumption	  is	  not	  on	  the	  radar	  of	  most	  health	  professionals	  (physicians,	  dietitians,	  
endocrinologists,	  nurses)	  as	  a	  modifiable	  lifestyle	  intervention	  for	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  
	  
5.6.1.3	  Coffee	  and	  Diabetes	  Management	  
Relatively	  few	  studies	  examine	  the	  impact	  of	  regular	  coffee	  consumption	  on	  the	  
management	  of	  diabetes	  and	  its	  comorbidities.	  This	  is,	  in	  part	  due	  to	  difficulty	  in	  controlling	  for	  

	  
9	  
variation	  in	  the	  progression	  and	  management	  of	  the	  disease.	  	  
Comorbidities	  associated	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  include	  neuropathy,	  retinopathy	  as	  well	  as	  
a	  host	  of	  psychosocial	  problems	  such	  as	  anxiety	  and	  depression.25,	  26	  	  A	  review	  of	  the	  influence	  of	  
type	  2	  diabetes	  and	  depression	  on	  quality	  of	  life	  in	  adults	  found	  that	  comorbid	  depression	  and	  
type	  2	  diabetes	  further	  diminishes	  the	  health-­‐related	  quality	  of	  life	  by	  more	  than	  two	  factors	  of	  
magnitude.26	  	  Depression	  in	  patients	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  is	  associated	  with	  hyperglycemica.27	  
Likely	  resulting	  from	  persistent	  hyperglycemia,	  diabetic	  patients	  with	  depression	  are	  also	  more	  
likely	  to	  suffer	  from	  neuropathy	  and	  retinopathy.28	  	  A	  cross-­‐sectional	  study	  on	  Japanese	  patients	  
with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  involving	  diabetic	  medical	  variables	  as	  well	  as	  self-­‐administered	  
questionnaires	  to	  assess	  food	  intake	  frequency,	  physical	  activity	  levels	  and	  depressive	  state	  
found	  that	  coffee	  consumption	  was	  inversely	  associated	  with	  symptoms	  of	  depression.	  	  The	  study	  
did	  not	  distinguish	  between	  caffeinated	  and	  decaffeinated	  coffee.	  	  Furthermore,	  a	  similar	  
association	  was	  not	  noted	  between	  tea	  or	  green	  tea	  consumption	  and	  depressive	  state.29	  	  Given	  
this,	  consumption	  of	  coffee	  may	  reduce	  psychosocial	  problems	  in	  individuals	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  
and	  potentially	  diminish	  the	  occurrence	  of	  detrimental	  comorbidities.	  
It	  is	  estimated	  that	  60%	  of	  individuals	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  have	  some	  form	  of	  cardiac	  
dysfunction	  or	  diabetic	  cardiomyopathy.30,	  31	  As	  a	  result,	  individuals	  with	  the	  disease	  are	  4-­‐6	  
times	  more	  likely	  to	  have	  heart	  disease	  or	  a	  stroke	  compared	  to	  healthy	  controls	  making	  it	  the	  
number	  one	  complication	  of	  the	  disease.32-­‐39	  Following	  a	  cardiovascular	  event,	  individuals	  with	  
diabetes	  are	  also	  at	  greater	  risk	  of	  an	  adverse	  outcome	  due	  to	  an	  imbalance	  in	  substrate	  
utilization.40,	  41	  Declines	  in	  cardiac	  function	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  are	  largely	  attributable	  to	  
systemic	  insulin	  resistance.	  The	  relationship	  between	  coffee	  or	  caffeine	  consumption	  and	  
cardiovascular	  risk	  is	  complex	  and	  appears	  to	  be	  partly	  dependent	  on	  genetics.	  For	  example,	  
there	  is	  evidence	  that	  caffeine	  can	  be	  detrimental	  to	  cardiovascular	  risk,	  but	  only	  in	  individuals	  

	  
10	  
who	  are	  slow	  metabolizers	  (CYP	  1A2/1F	  variant)	  of	  the	  drug17.	  As	  such,	  understanding	  the	  
relationship	  between	  caffeine	  or	  coffee	  and	  genetic	  variance	  is	  an	  important	  consideration	  in	  the	  
assessment	  of	  diet-­‐disease	  associations.	  
	  	  
Conversely,	  coffee	  consumption	  may	  exert	  some	  protective	  effects	  on	  the	  heart	  through	  its	  
actions	  on	  glucagon-­‐like	  peptide-­‐1	  (GLP-­‐1).42	  GLP-­‐1	  receptor	  agonists	  and	  dipeptidyl	  peptidase-­‐4	  
(DPP-­‐4)	  inhibitors	  have	  emerged	  as	  a	  potential	  therapy	  for	  type	  2	  diabetes	  and	  cardiovascular	  
comorbidities,	  to	  prolong	  and	  amplify	  effects	  of	  GLP-­‐1,	  which	  are	  naturally	  limited	  due	  to	  a	  very	  
short	  half-­‐life,	  via	  metabolism	  by	  DPP-­‐4.	  	  In	  addition	  to	  the	  beneficial	  impacts	  on	  glucoregulation,	  
there	  is	  growing	  evidence	  suggesting	  that	  GLP-­‐1	  and	  GLP-­‐1	  receptor	  agonists	  may	  reduce	  the	  risk	  
of	  coronary	  heart	  disease	  through	  improved	  atherosclerosis	  markers,	  lipid	  metabolism,	  blood	  
pressure	  and	  coronary	  blood	  flow.43	  Coffee	  consumption	  has	  been	  found	  to	  cause	  an	  increase	  in	  
GLP-­‐1	  production,	  this	  could	  contribute	  to	  cardioprotective	  properties	  of	  coffee	  as	  well	  as	  
glucoregulatory	  improvements	  in	  individuals	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  mellitus.42	  	  
Nephropathy	  is	  another	  common	  comorbidity	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  Persistent	  hyperglycemia,	  
oxidative	  stress	  and	  kidney	  cell	  death	  are	  all	  considered	  to	  be	  contributing	  factors	  to	  the	  
destruction	  of	  the	  kidneys.	  	  Given	  this,	  the	  high	  antioxidant	  content	  of	  coffee	  may	  limit	  the	  
progression	  of	  nephropathy	  as	  coffee	  consumption	  accounts	  for	  60-­‐70%	  of	  daily	  antioxidant	  
intake	  in	  the	  form	  of	  polyphenols	  in	  the	  modern	  diet.44,	  45	  Likewise,	  a	  component	  of	  coffee,	  
trigonelline	  was	  found	  to	  reverse	  the	  severity	  of	  kidney	  damage	  in	  diabetic	  rats.46	  Furthermore,	  
two	  cross-­‐sectional	  studies	  have	  identified	  an	  inverse	  association	  between	  coffee	  consumption	  
and	  risk	  of	  renal	  impairment,	  as	  assessed	  by	  estimated	  glomerular	  filtration	  risk,	  in	  Korean	  
women	  with	  and	  without	  diabetes	  and	  healthy	  Japanese	  male	  and	  female	  adults,	  respectively.	  47,	  
48	  

	  
11	  
	  
5.6.2	  Mechanistic	  Insights	  	  
Because	  coffee	  consumption	  appears	  to	  have	  such	  profound	  impacts	  on	  reducing	  the	  risk	  of	  
type	  2	  diabetes,	  efforts	  to	  understand	  the	  mechanism(s)	  by	  which	  it	  exerts	  its	  effects	  are	  of	  
interest.	  At	  present,	  there	  are	  many	  different	  lines	  of	  evidence	  with	  varying	  levels	  of	  support	  
(Table	  2).	  	  In	  this	  section,	  we	  briefly	  highlight	  findings	  from	  observational	  data	  and	  review	  
findings	  on	  proposed	  biochemical	  mechanisms.	  	  
	  
[INSERT	  TABLE	  2	  NEAR	  HERE]	  
	  
5.6.2.1	  Observational	  Data	  	  
While	  epidemiological	  studies	  are	  highly	  valuable,	  they	  cannot	  address	  causality.	  	  For	  this	  
reason,	  clinical,	  biochemical	  and	  molecular	  studies	  are	  valuable	  in	  deciphering	  mechanism.	  In	  
particular,	  chronic	  coffee	  consumption	  appears	  to	  alter	  the	  way	  we	  respond	  to	  a	  glucose	  load.	  
Whether	  this	  beneficial	  effect	  is	  due	  to	  alterations	  to	  peripheral	  insulin	  sensitivity,	  insulin	  
secretion	  or	  peripheral	  glucose	  disposal	  is	  not	  well	  understood.	  Perhaps	  most	  interesting	  is	  that	  
one	  does	  not	  have	  to	  consume	  coffee	  immediately	  prior	  to	  an	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test	  to	  
observe	  its	  protective	  effects.	  Protective	  effects	  of	  coffee	  consumption	  are	  observed	  during	  an	  
oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test	  in	  which	  individuals	  were	  fasted	  for	  12	  hours.3	  This	  timeline	  provides	  
some	  important	  mechanistic	  clues.	  First,	  the	  protective	  effects	  of	  coffee	  are	  likely	  independent	  of	  
the	  direct	  effects	  of	  caffeine,	  namely	  the	  antagonism	  of	  adenosine	  receptors	  as	  the	  majority	  of	  
caffeine	  would	  be	  excreted	  by	  12	  hours.	  The	  finding	  that	  the	  protective	  effects	  of	  coffee	  occur	  
with	  both	  caffeinated	  and	  decaffeinated	  coffee	  supports	  this	  caffeine-­‐independent	  hypothesis.	  
Second,	  finding	  protective	  effects	  despite	  no	  direct	  coffee	  consumption	  raises	  the	  possibility	  that	  

	  
12	  
the	  effects	  are	  ‘programmed’	  or	  due	  to	  another	  environmental	  influence	  (e.g.	  gut	  microbiota).	  
Possible	  mechanisms	  by	  which	  this	  could	  occur	  are	  briefly	  discussed	  below	  and	  summarized	  in	  
Table	  2.	  
	  
	  
5.6.2.2	  	  Clinical,	  Biochemical	  and	  Molecular	  Data	  
Gut	  peptides	  and	  the	  microbiota.	  Coffee	  consumption	  appears	  to	  modulate	  the	  incretin	  hormones	  
glucagon	  like	  peptide	  1	  (GLP-­‐1)	  and	  glucose-­‐dependent	  insulinotropic	  peptide	  (GIP).49,	  50	  These	  
gut	  hormones	  are	  secreted	  into	  the	  blood	  by	  enteroendocrine	  cells	  and	  one	  of	  their	  most	  
important	  roles	  is	  to	  regulate	  the	  insulin	  secretion	  in	  the	  postprandial	  state.	  Greenberg	  and	  
colleagues51	  report	  an	  increase	  in	  GLP-­‐1	  concentrations	  after	  ingestion	  of	  decaffeinated	  coffee.	  
Since	  GLP-­‐1	  secretion	  is	  reduced	  in	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  increasing	  GLP-­‐1	  secretion	  
induced	  by	  decaffeinated	  coffee	  intake	  is	  one	  important	  mechanism	  related	  to	  its	  protective	  
effects.	  Peptide	  YY	  (PYY),	  secreted	  from	  the	  same	  intestinal	  L-­‐cells	  as	  GLP-­‐1,	  is	  another	  
gastrointestinal	  peptide	  secreted	  in	  response	  to	  lipids	  and	  carbohydrates	  and	  involved	  in	  
satiation.52	  	  Greenberg	  and	  Geliebter53	  conducted	  a	  placebo-­‐controlled	  randomized	  crossover	  
trial	  to	  examine	  the	  acute	  effects	  of	  caffeine,	  caffeinated	  coffee	  and	  decaffeinated	  coffee	  on	  
hunger	  and	  satiety	  hormone	  response	  in	  healthy	  adults.	  	  The	  trial	  revealed	  that	  decaffeinated	  
coffee	  resulted	  in	  higher	  plasma	  PYY	  concentrations	  than	  placebo	  and	  caffeine.	  	  This	  was	  
accompanied	  by	  lower	  perceived	  hunger	  levels,	  as	  assessed	  through	  participant	  ratings	  of	  visual	  
analog	  scales.	  	  While	  higher	  PYY	  lasted	  for	  only	  1.5	  hours,	  and	  was	  diminished	  for	  the	  final	  1.5	  
hours	  of	  the	  trial,	  these	  changes	  were	  related	  to	  significantly	  lower	  hunger	  3	  hours	  following	  
consumption	  of	  the	  decaffeinated	  coffee.	  	  Similar	  results	  were	  not	  found	  following	  consumption	  
of	  regular,	  caffeinated	  coffee.	  	  These	  results	  indicate	  that	  decaffeinated	  coffee	  consumption	  

	  
13	  
acutely	  increases	  PYY	  secretion	  and	  improves	  satiety,	  potentially	  contributing	  to	  the	  protective	  
nature	  of	  coffee	  consumption	  against	  the	  onset	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes.	  
	  	  
Further	  down	  in	  the	  gastrointestinal	  tract,	  regular	  coffee	  consumption	  is	  also	  known	  to	  
influence	  the	  composition	  of	  the	  gut	  microbiota.	  Collectively,	  the	  human	  gut	  consists	  of	  up	  to	  100	  
trillion	  microorganisms,	  a	  number	  far	  exceeding	  the	  total	  number	  of	  our	  somatic	  cells.54,	  55	  The	  
gut	  microbiota	  plays	  an	  important	  role	  in	  both	  metabolism	  and	  caloric	  extraction	  from	  dietary	  
sources.	  Alterations	  in	  the	  microbiome	  have	  been	  linked	  to	  numerous	  metabolic	  disease	  states	  
including	  obesity	  54,	  56,	  insulin	  resistance	  57,	  cardiovascular	  disease	  58	  in	  observational	  and	  cross-­‐
sectional	  studies,	  while	  direct	  causation	  has	  been	  proven	  in	  animal	  models	  employing	  fecal	  
transplant	  experiments.59	  In	  fact,	  the	  gut	  microbiota	  are	  now	  widely	  considered	  to	  be	  an	  
environmental	  factor	  promoting	  both	  obesity	  and	  insulin	  resistance.	  
Chronic	  coffee	  administration	  to	  rodents	  in	  combination	  with	  a	  chow	  or	  high-­‐fat	  diet	  for	  
10	  weeks	  demonstrated	  coffee	  to	  decrease	  body	  weight,	  adiposity,	  liver	  triglycerides	  and	  energy	  
intake.60	  However,	  coffee	  consuming	  animals	  also	  displayed	  profound	  systemic	  insulin	  resistance,	  
likely	  due	  to	  caffeine	  (addressed	  in	  the	  below	  section	  on	  the	  caffeine-­‐coffee	  paradox).	  Coffee	  
consumption	  attenuated	  the	  increase	  in	  Firmicutes	  to	  Bacteroidetes	  bacterial	  ratio	  normally	  
associated	  with	  obesity	  and	  high	  fat	  feeding.	  Given	  this,	  and	  the	  fact	  that	  coffee	  metabolites	  can	  
appear	  >12	  h	  after	  ingestion61,	  it	  is	  very	  likely	  that	  colonic	  gut	  microbiota	  are	  exposed	  to	  
numerous	  coffee-­‐derived	  compounds.62	  Whether	  the	  microbiota	  are	  responsible	  for	  coffee’s	  
beneficial	  effects	  in	  humans	  requires	  further	  study.	  	  
	  
Modulation	  of	  Glucose	  and	  Fatty	  Acid	  Metabolism.	  	  Chronic	  coffee	  consumption	  impacts	  the	  
response	  to	  a	  glucose	  challenge.63	  This	  is	  evident	  in	  oral	  glucose	  tests	  wherein	  the	  glucose	  peak,	  
area	  under	  the	  curve	  and	  various	  indices	  of	  glucose	  tolerance	  are	  improved	  with	  chronic	  coffee	  

	  
14	  
consumption.3	  This	  reduction	  may	  involve	  a	  slower	  absorption	  in	  the	  intestine	  by	  inhibition	  of	  
sodium	  glucose	  co-­‐transporters64	  or	  a	  reduction	  in	  glucose-­‐6-­‐phosphatase	  activity	  in	  the	  liver	  
thereby	  inhibiting	  glucose	  release.65	  A	  number	  of	  studies	  have	  also	  shown	  coffee	  consumption	  to	  
alter	  liver	  enzymes	  (aspartate	  aminotransferase	  and	  alanine	  aminotransferase)66-­‐69and	  glucose	  
kinetics.70,	  71	  Glucose	  mediation	  may	  also	  stem	  from	  alterations	  to	  fatty	  acid	  metabolism.	  Glucose	  
metabolism	  is	  intertwined	  and	  dependent	  in	  many	  ways	  on	  the	  storage	  and	  metabolism	  of	  fatty	  
acids.	  Numerous	  recent	  investigations	  have	  focused	  on	  understanding	  the	  impacts	  of	  coffee	  
consumption	  on	  fat	  deposition,	  lipolysis	  and	  regulation.	  
Adiponectin	  is	  a	  hormone	  secreted	  from	  adipocytes	  involved	  in	  glucoregulation	  and	  is	  
considered	  a	  mediator	  of	  metabolic	  disease	  risk.72	  	  Low	  plasma	  adiponectin	  concentrations	  are	  a	  
predicting	  factor	  of	  future	  diabetes	  development	  while	  elevated	  levels	  increase	  insulin	  
sensitivity.73	  Administration	  of	  chlorogenic	  acid,	  a	  key	  coffee	  derived	  antioxidant	  for	  12	  weeks	  to	  
the	  db/db	  mouse	  (a	  model	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes)	  resulted	  in	  elevated	  circulating	  adiponectin	  levels,	  
upregulation	  of	  adiponectin	  receptors	  and	  increased	  phosphorylation	  of	  AMP-­‐activated	  protein	  
kinase	  (AMPK,	  a	  key	  regulator	  of	  energy	  status).74	  These	  changes	  were	  accompanied	  by	  a	  
reduction	  in	  body	  fat,	  plasma	  glucose	  and	  HbA1c.	  	  Positive	  results	  have	  also	  been	  confirmed	  in	  
humans.	  In	  a	  cross-­‐sectional	  study	  by	  Bhaktha	  et	  al.	  75,	  mean	  adiponectin	  concentrations	  were	  
higher,	  accompanied	  by	  lower	  fasting	  blood	  glucose	  levels	  in	  healthy	  and	  type	  2	  diabetic	  
individuals	  who	  consume	  coffee	  (more	  than	  three	  cups	  of	  coffee	  per	  day	  for	  a	  minimum	  of	  15	  
years),	  than	  in	  non-­‐consumers.	  	  Furthermore,	  coffee-­‐consuming	  diabetics	  had	  significantly	  lower	  
HbA1c	  values	  than	  non-­‐consumers.	  Along	  the	  same	  lines,	  a	  study	  by	  Kempf	  et	  al.76	  administered	  
either	  medium	  or	  dark	  roast	  coffee	  differing	  in	  chlorogenic	  acids	  and	  N-­‐methylpyridinium,	  a	  
degradation	  product	  of	  trigonelline	  in	  a	  cross-­‐over	  design.	  Following	  three	  months	  of	  
administration,	  the	  medium,	  but	  not	  the	  dark	  roast	  resulted	  in	  an	  increase	  in	  circulating	  

	  
15	  
adiponectin	  levels	  by	  ~6%.	  The	  clinical	  relevance	  of	  this	  change	  in	  the	  context	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  
is	  uncertain,	  but	  it	  likely	  has	  a	  benefit.	  Together,	  this	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  regular,	  moderate	  
coffee	  consumption	  may	  have	  a	  beneficial	  effect	  on	  increasing	  adiponectin	  and	  subsequent	  
glycemic	  control	  in	  individuals	  with	  and	  without	  diabetes.	  
Micronutrients	  and	  other	  coffee	  derived	  compounds.	  Coffee	  makes	  a	  large	  contribution	  to	  daily	  
intake	  of	  magnesium	  for	  individuals	  of	  various	  nationalities.77	  	  Prospective	  studies	  have	  found	  an	  
inverse	  association	  with	  magnesium	  intake	  and	  incidence	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  independent	  of	  
other	  typical	  risk	  factors.	  	  This	  inverse	  relationship	  also	  appears	  to	  exist	  between	  magnesium	  and	  
typical	  predictors	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  such	  as	  body	  mass	  index,	  activity	  levels	  and	  family	  history.78	  
A	  prospective	  study	  of	  magnesium	  intake	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes	  incidence	  in	  a	  Japanese	  population	  
reaffirmed	  this	  inverse	  relationship	  between	  magnesium	  intake	  and	  disease	  incidence,	  but	  found	  
magnesium	  to	  be	  an	  especially	  effective	  protective	  factor	  for	  individuals	  with	  insulin	  resistance	  
and	  low-­‐grade	  inflammation.79	  Another	  study	  examined	  the	  relationship	  between	  magnesium	  
intake	  and	  7-­‐year	  changes	  to	  insulin	  resistance,	  insulin	  sensitivity,	  fasting	  glucose	  and	  insulin	  in	  
individuals	  with	  pre-­‐diabetes.	  	  Results	  indicated	  that	  magnesium	  intake	  was	  associated	  with	  
lower	  fasting	  glucose	  and	  insulin	  resistance,	  but	  not	  insulin	  sensitivity	  or	  fasting	  insulin	  levels.	  	  
Overall,	  higher	  magnesium	  intake	  was	  associated	  with	  a	  lower	  risk	  of	  diabetes.80	  	  This	  data	  
suggests	  that	  magnesium	  content	  in	  coffee	  may	  be	  one	  of	  the	  components	  involved	  in	  its	  
protective	  effect	  against	  the	  onset	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  and	  that	  it	  may	  be	  especially	  beneficial	  in	  
preventing	  disease	  progression.	  
Coffee	  is	  also	  a	  source	  of	  trigonelline,	  a	  metabolite	  of	  niacin	  and	  vitamin	  B3.81	  Of	  note,	  
trigonelline	  is	  also	  a	  major	  component	  of	  the	  fenugreek	  plant	  which	  is	  used	  in	  traditional	  Chinese	  
medicine	  to	  treat	  diabetes.82	  	  A	  study	  found	  trigonelline	  administration	  to	  diabetic	  rats	  improved	  
HbA1c,	  inhibited	  DPP-­‐4,	  restored	  β-­‐cell	  mass	  and	  lowered	  blood	  glucose	  concurrently	  with	  an	  

	  
16	  
increase	  in	  insulin	  concentration,	  suggesting	  that	  trigonelline	  improves	  glycemic	  control,	  
potentially	  through	  regeneration	  of	  β-­‐cells.83	  Likewise	  a	  similar	  study	  on	  diabetic	  rats	  found	  that	  
trigonelline	  partially	  corrected	  diabetic	  peripheral	  neuropathy,	  in	  addition	  to	  a	  hypoglycemic	  
effect.82	  A	  human	  study	  investigating	  acute	  incretin	  secretion	  effects	  from	  trigonelline,	  
chlorogenic	  acid	  and	  decaffeinated	  coffee	  administration	  prior	  to	  an	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test	  
found	  no	  significant	  impact	  on	  GLP-­‐1	  and	  GIP	  response.84	  These	  studies	  suggest	  that	  trigonelline,	  
via	  coffee	  consumption,	  may	  improve	  glycemic	  control	  as	  well	  as	  ameliorate	  complications	  
associated	  with	  type	  2	  diabetes	  when	  consumed	  chronically,	  but	  these	  benefits	  may	  not	  be	  
observed	  from	  acute	  consumption.	  	  
	  
Alteration	  of	  Secretory,	  Inflammatory	  and	  Signalling	  Cascades.	  Type	  2	  diabetes	  is	  a	  complex	  
disease,	  affecting	  multiple	  organ	  systems.	  The	  disease	  is	  well	  documented	  to	  alter	  gene	  
expression,	  cell	  signalling	  and	  nutrient	  handling.	  It	  is	  also	  a	  state	  of	  low-­‐grade	  inflammation	  with	  
the	  induction	  of	  pro-­‐inflammatory	  cytokines.	  Tumor	  necrosis	  factor-­‐α	  (TNF-­‐α)	  is	  a	  cytokine	  that	  
has	  been	  associated	  with	  the	  development	  of	  diabetes	  complications	  including	  diabetic	  
nephropathy.	  Lampropoulou	  and	  colleagues85	  reported	  that	  TNF-­‐α	  urinary	  levels	  of	  patients	  with	  
type	  2	  diabetes	  are	  associated	  with	  microalbuminuria,	  	  indicating	  its	  role	  in	  the	  pathogenesis	  and	  
progression	  of	  diabetic	  nephropathy.85	  A	  study	  in	  diabetic	  mice	  showed	  that	  high	  consumption	  of	  
coffee	  or	  pure	  caffeine	  exerted	  positive	  effects	  in	  reducing	  the	  expression	  of	  TNF-­‐	  α,	  
hyperglycemia,	  fat	  mass,	  and	  also	  the	  expression	  of	  hepatic	  genes	  involved	  in	  fatty	  acid	  
synthesis.86	  Coffee	  consumption	  may	  also	  exert	  anti-­‐inflammatory	  effects	  and	  increase	  insulin	  
sensitivity	  via	  AMPK	  activation.	  This	  enzyme	  is	  involved	  in	  the	  regulation	  of	  several	  physiological	  
processes	  such	  as	  glucose	  transport,	  mitochondrial	  function,	  synthesis	  of	  proteins	  and	  lipids,	  
cellular	  growth,	  and	  factors	  that	  are	  associated	  with	  inflammation	  and	  insulin	  resistance.87	  Ong	  

	  
17	  
and	  colleagues88	  studied	  the	  beneficial	  effects	  of	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  found	  chlorogenic	  acid	  	  
to	  increased	  AMPK	  activity	  in	  male	  diabetic	  rats.88	  	  
	  
5.6.3 Coffee-­‐Caffeine	  Paradox	  
	  
As	  there	  is	  a	  strong	  relation	  between	  coffee	  and	  caffeine	  consumption,	  it	  is	  difficult	  to	  
separate	  the	  individual	  effects	  of	  each	  on	  glucose	  tolerance	  and	  the	  development	  of	  type	  2	  
diabetes.	  	  While	  coffee	  consumption	  appears	  to	  promote	  glucose	  tolerance	  and	  whole	  body	  
insulin	  sensitivity,	  the	  consumption	  of	  caffeine	  has	  the	  opposite	  effect.89,	  90	  It	  is	  accepted	  that	  co-­‐
administration	  of	  a	  carbohydrate	  load	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  caffeine	  alone	  impairs	  whole	  body	  
glucose	  disposal	  by	  ~20-­‐30%	  in	  adults.91-­‐95	  Reductions	  in	  whole	  body	  glucose	  disposal	  have	  been	  
shown	  during	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  tests	  and	  euglycemic-­‐hyperinsulinemic	  clamps.96-­‐101	  
Caffeine	  induced	  glucose	  intolerance	  occurs	  in	  a	  dose-­‐dependent	  manner	  at	  concentrations	  as	  
low	  as	  1mg	  caffeine/kg	  body	  weight,	  with	  no	  apparent	  threshold.91	  Habitual	  consumption	  of	  
caffeine	  does	  not	  appear	  to	  result	  in	  an	  adaptation	  to	  this	  response.93	  As	  the	  half-­‐life	  of	  caffeine	  is	  
in	  the	  range	  of	  4-­‐6	  hours102,	  insulin	  action	  could	  be	  impaired	  for	  some	  hours	  after	  ingestion.	  
When	  an	  equivalent	  dose	  of	  caffeine	  is	  administered	  as	  the	  pure	  alkaloid,	  or	  as	  a	  part	  of	  coffee	  
prior	  to	  an	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test,	  results	  show	  that	  the	  degree	  of	  impairment	  due	  to	  caffeine	  
is	  less	  when	  caffeine	  is	  consumed	  as	  coffee.	  Despite	  the	  detrimental	  effects	  of	  caffeine	  contained	  
in	  coffee	  on	  glucose	  tolerance,	  the	  overall	  effect	  of	  chronic	  coffee	  consumption	  on	  type	  2	  diabetes	  
risk	  is	  positive.	  	  
5.6.4	  	  	  Conclusion	  
	  
In	  this	  chapter	  we	  have	  reviewed	  the	  evidence	  concerning	  the	  relationship	  between	  long-­‐
term	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  the	  risk,	  development,	  progression	  and	  management	  of	  type	  2	  
diabetes.	  While	  the	  literature	  on	  the	  relationship	  of	  other	  disease	  states	  (e.g.	  cardiovascular	  

	  
18	  
disease,	  cancer)	  and	  coffee	  consumption	  remains	  controversial,	  it	  is	  widely	  accepted	  that	  long-­‐
term	  coffee	  consumption	  is	  of	  significant	  benefit	  to	  the	  disease.	  With	  escalating	  rates	  of	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  in	  the	  population,	  its	  high	  rate	  of	  misdiagnosis	  and	  its	  expensive	  management	  coffee	  
consumption	  represents	  an	  easily	  implemented	  and	  effective	  lifestyle	  strategy.	  Going	  forward,	  
there	  are	  gaps	  in	  our	  knowledge	  of	  the	  mechanisms	  by	  which	  coffee	  exerts	  its	  beneficial	  effects,	  
and	  given	  the	  range	  of	  evidence,	  it	  likely	  impacts	  multiple	  sites.	  	  
	  
Acknowledgements	  
JS	  is	  supported	  by	  the	  Natural	  Science	  and	  Engineering	  Research	  Council	  of	  Canada.	  The	  
professional	  manuscript	  proofreading	  and	  editing	  provided	  by	  Mr.	  Paul	  H.	  Martin	  were	  greatly	  
appreciated.	  	  
	  
Abbreviations	  
AMPK,	  AMP-­‐activated	  protein	  kinase;	  CI,	  confidence	  interval;	  GIP,	  	  glucagon	  like	  peptide	  1;	  
GLP,	  glucose-­‐dependent	  insulinotropic	  peptide;	  GMAF,	  global	  minor	  allele	  frequency;	  HbA1c,	  
glycated	  haemoglobin;	  HOMA-­‐IR,	  homeostatic	  model	  of	  assessment	  for	  insulin	  resistance;	  HOMA-­‐
β	  homeostatic	  model	  of	  assessment	  for	  β-­‐cell	  function;	  OGTT,	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test;	  PYY,	  
peptide	  YY;	  SNP,	  single	  nucleotide	  polymorphism;	  T2D,	  type	  2	  diabetes	  mellitus;	  TNF	  α,	  Tumor	  
necrosis	  factor-­‐α	  	  
	  
	  

	  
19	  
References	  
	  
1.	  
WHO.	  Global	  status	  report	  on	  noncommunicable	  diseases	  2014.	  Geneva,	  World	  Health	  
Organization,	  2012.	  .	  Fact	  Sheet	  312.	  Jan	  2015.	  
2.	  
Ding	  M,	  Bhupathiraju	  SN,	  Chen	  M,	  van	  Dam	  RM,	  Hu	  FB.	  Caffeinated	  and	  Decaffeinated	  
Coffee	  Consumption	  and	  Risk	  of	  Type	  2	  Diabetes:	  A	  Systematic	  Review	  and	  a	  Dose-­‐Response	  
Meta-­‐analysis.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  2014;37(2):569-­‐86.	  
3.	  
Yarmolinsky	  J,	  Mueller	  NT,	  Duncan	  BB,	  Bisi	  Molina	  Mdel	  C,	  Goulart	  AC,	  Schmidt	  MI.	  Coffee	  
Consumption,	  Newly	  Diagnosed	  Diabetes,	  and	  Other	  Alterations	  in	  Glucose	  Homeostasis:	  A	  Cross-­‐
Sectional	  Analysis	  of	  the	  Longitudinal	  Study	  of	  Adult	  Health	  (ELSA-­‐Brasil).	  PLoS	  One.	  
2015;10(5):e0126469.	  
4.	  
Agardh	  EE,	  Carlsson,	  S.,	  Ahlbom,	  A.,	  	  Efendic,	  S.,	  Grill,	  V.,	  	  Hammar,	  N.,	  	  Hilding,	  A.,	  	  
&Östenson,	  C.-­‐G.	  .	  Coffee	  consumption,	  type	  2	  diabetes	  and	  impaired	  glucose	  tolerance	  in	  Swedish	  
men	  and	  women	  Journal	  of	  Internal	  Medicine	  2004;255(6):645-­‐52.	  
5.	  
Jiang	  X,	  Zhang	  D,	  Jiang	  W.	  Coffee	  and	  caffeine	  intake	  and	  incidence	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  
mellitus:	  a	  meta-­‐analysis	  of	  prospective	  studies.	  Eur	  J	  Nutr.	  2014;53(1):25-­‐38.	  
6.	  
Cornelis	  MC,	  Monda	  KL,	  Yu	  K,	  Paynter	  N,	  Azzato	  EM,	  Bennett	  SN,	  et	  al.	  Genome-­‐wide	  meta-­‐
analysis	  identifies	  regions	  on	  7p21	  (AHR)	  and	  15q24	  (CYP1A2)	  as	  determinants	  of	  habitual	  
caffeine	  consumption.	  PLoS	  genetics.	  2011;7(4):e1002033.	  
7.	  
Josse	  AR,	  Da	  Costa	  LA,	  Campos	  H,	  El-­‐Sohemy	  A.	  Associations	  between	  polymorphisms	  in	  
the	  AHR	  and	  CYP1A1-­‐CYP1A2	  gene	  regions	  and	  habitual	  caffeine	  consumption.	  Am	  J	  Clin	  Nutr.	  
2012;96(3):665-­‐71.	  

	  
20	  
8.	  
Cornelis	  MC,	  El-­‐Sohemy	  A,	  Campos	  H.	  Genetic	  polymorphism	  of	  the	  adenosine	  A2A	  
receptor	  is	  associated	  with	  habitual	  caffeine	  consumption.	  The	  American	  journal	  of	  clinical	  
nutrition.	  2007;86(1):240-­‐4.	  
9.	  
Griffiths	  RR,	  Evans	  SM,	  Heishman	  SJ,	  Preston	  KL,	  Sannerud	  CA,	  Wolf	  B,	  et	  al.	  Low-­‐dose	  
caffeine	  discrimination	  in	  humans.	  J	  Pharmacol	  Exp	  Ther.	  1990;252(3):970-­‐8.	  
10.	  
Chesley	  A,	  Howlett	  RA,	  Heigenhauser	  GJ,	  Hultman	  E,	  Spriet	  LL.	  Regulation	  of	  muscle	  
glycogenolytic	  flux	  during	  intense	  aerobic	  exercise	  after	  caffeine	  ingestion.	  The	  American	  journal	  
of	  physiology.	  1998;275(2	  Pt	  2):R596-­‐603.	  
11.	  
Battram	  DS,	  Graham	  TE,	  Dela	  F.	  Caffeine's	  impairment	  of	  insulin-­‐mediated	  glucose	  
disposal	  cannot	  be	  solely	  attributed	  to	  adrenaline	  in	  humans.	  J	  Physiol.	  2007;583(Pt	  3):1069-­‐77.	  
12.	  
Battram	  DS,	  Graham	  TE,	  Richter	  EA,	  Dela	  F.	  The	  effect	  of	  caffeine	  on	  glucose	  kinetics	  in	  
humans-­‐-­‐influence	  of	  adrenaline.	  J	  Physiol.	  2005;569(Pt	  1):347-­‐55.	  
13.	  
Graham	  TE,	  Battram	  DS,	  Dela	  F,	  El-­‐Sohemy	  A,	  Thong	  FS.	  Does	  caffeine	  alter	  muscle	  
carbohydrate	  and	  fat	  metabolism	  during	  exercise?	  Applied	  physiology,	  nutrition,	  and	  metabolism	  
=	  Physiologie	  appliquee,	  nutrition	  et	  metabolisme.	  2008;33(6):1311-­‐8.	  
14.	  
Laitala	  VS,	  Kaprio	  J,	  Silventoinen	  K.	  Genetics	  of	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  its	  stability.	  
Addiction.	  2008;103(12):2054-­‐61.	  
15.	  
Alsene	  K,	  Deckert	  J,	  Sand	  P,	  de	  Wit	  H.	  Association	  between	  A2a	  receptor	  gene	  
polymorphisms	  and	  caffeine-­‐induced	  anxiety.	  Neuropsychopharmacology.	  2003;28(9):1694-­‐702.	  

	  
21	  
16.	  
Childs	  E,	  Hohoff	  C,	  Deckert	  J,	  Xu	  K,	  Badner	  J,	  de	  Wit	  H.	  Association	  between	  ADORA2A	  and	  
DRD2	  polymorphisms	  and	  caffeine-­‐induced	  anxiety.	  Neuropsychopharmacology.	  
2008;33(12):2791-­‐800.	  
17.	  
Cornelis	  MC,	  El-­‐Sohemy	  A.	  Coffee,	  caffeine,	  and	  coronary	  heart	  disease.	  Curr	  Opin	  Clin	  
Nutr	  Metab	  Care.	  2007;10(6):745-­‐51.	  
18.	  
McMahon	  G,	  Taylor	  AE,	  Davey	  Smith	  G,	  Munafo	  MR.	  Phenotype	  refinement	  strengthens	  the	  
association	  of	  AHR	  and	  CYP1A1	  genotype	  with	  caffeine	  consumption.	  PLoS	  One.	  
2014;9(7):e103448.	  
19.	  
Nordestgaard	  AT,	  Thomsen	  M,	  Nordestgaard	  BG.	  Coffee	  intake	  and	  risk	  of	  obesity,	  
metabolic	  syndrome	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes:	  a	  Mendelian	  randomization	  study.	  International	  journal	  
of	  epidemiology.	  2015;44(2):551-­‐65.	  
20.	  
Rodenburg	  EM,	  Eijgelsheim	  M,	  Geleijnse	  JM,	  Amin	  N,	  van	  Duijn	  CM,	  Hofman	  A,	  et	  al.	  
CYP1A2	  and	  coffee	  intake	  and	  the	  modifying	  effect	  of	  sex,	  age,	  and	  smoking.	  Am	  J	  Clin	  Nutr.	  
2012;96(1):182-­‐7.	  
21.	  
Amin	  N,	  Byrne	  E,	  Johnson	  J,	  Chenevix-­‐Trench	  G,	  Walter	  S,	  Nolte	  IM,	  et	  al.	  Genome-­‐wide	  
association	  analysis	  of	  coffee	  drinking	  suggests	  association	  with	  CYP1A1/CYP1A2	  and	  NRCAM.	  
Mol	  Psychiatry.	  2012;17(11):1116-­‐29.	  
22.	  
Sulem	  P,	  Gudbjartsson	  DF,	  Geller	  F,	  Prokopenko	  I,	  Feenstra	  B,	  Aben	  KK,	  et	  al.	  Sequence	  
variants	  at	  CYP1A1-­‐CYP1A2	  and	  AHR	  associate	  with	  coffee	  consumption.	  Hum	  Mol	  Genet.	  
2011;20(10):2071-­‐7.	  

	  
22	  
23.	  
Matsuda	  M,	  DeFronzo	  RA.	  Insulin	  sensitivity	  indices	  obtained	  from	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  
testing:	  comparison	  with	  the	  euglycemic	  insulin	  clamp.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  1999;22(9):1462-­‐70.	  
24.	  
Smith	  B,	  Wingard	  DL,	  Smith	  TC,	  Kritz-­‐Silverstein	  D,	  Barrett-­‐Connor	  E.	  Does	  coffee	  
consumption	  reduce	  the	  risk	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  in	  individuals	  with	  impaired	  glucose?	  Diabetes	  
Care.	  2006;29(11):2385-­‐90.	  
25.	  
Candrilli	  SD,	  Meyers	  JL,	  Boye	  K,	  Bae	  JP.	  Health	  care	  resource	  utilization	  and	  costs	  during	  
episodes	  of	  care	  for	  type	  2	  diabetes	  mellitus-­‐related	  comorbidities.	  Journal	  of	  diabetes	  and	  its	  
complications.	  2015;29(4):529-­‐33.	  
26.	  
Egede	  LE,	  Hernandez-­‐Tejada	  MA.	  Effect	  of	  comorbid	  depression	  on	  quality	  of	  life	  in	  adults	  
with	  Type	  2	  diabetes.	  Expert	  review	  of	  pharmacoeconomics	  &	  outcomes	  research.	  
2013;13(1):83-­‐91.	  
27.	  
Lustman	  PJ,	  Anderson	  RJ,	  Freedland	  KE,	  de	  Groot	  M,	  Carney	  RM,	  Clouse	  RE.	  Depression	  
and	  poor	  glycemic	  control:	  a	  meta-­‐analytic	  review	  of	  the	  literature.	  Diabetes	  care.	  
2000;23(7):934-­‐42.	  
28.	  
Yoshida	  S,	  Hirai	  M,	  Suzuki	  S,	  Awata	  S,	  Oka	  Y.	  Neuropathy	  is	  associated	  with	  depression	  
independently	  of	  health-­‐related	  quality	  of	  life	  in	  Japanese	  patients	  with	  diabetes.	  Psychiatry	  and	  
clinical	  neurosciences.	  2009;63(1):65-­‐72.	  
29.	  
Omagari	  K,	  Sakaki	  M,	  Tsujimoto	  Y,	  Shiogama	  Y,	  Iwanaga	  A,	  Ishimoto	  M,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  
consumption	  is	  inversely	  associated	  with	  depressive	  status	  in	  Japanese	  patients	  with	  type	  2	  
diabetes.	  Journal	  of	  clinical	  biochemistry	  and	  nutrition.	  2014;55(2):135-­‐42.	  

	  
23	  
30.	  
Poirier	  P,	  Bogaty	  P,	  Garneau	  C,	  Marois	  L,	  Dumesnil	  JG.	  Diastolic	  dysfunction	  in	  
normotensive	  men	  with	  well-­‐controlled	  type	  2	  diabetes:	  importance	  of	  maneuvers	  in	  
echocardiographic	  screening	  for	  preclinical	  diabetic	  cardiomyopathy.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  
2001;24(1):5-­‐10.	  
31.	  
Redfield	  MM,	  Jacobsen	  SJ,	  Burnett	  JC,	  Jr.,	  Mahoney	  DW,	  Bailey	  KR,	  Rodeheffer	  RJ.	  Burden	  of	  
systolic	  and	  diastolic	  ventricular	  dysfunction	  in	  the	  community:	  appreciating	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  
heart	  failure	  epidemic.	  Jama.	  2003;289(2):194-­‐202.	  
32.	  
Canada	  PHAo.	  Diabetes	  in	  Canada	  -­‐	  National	  Statistics	  and	  Opportunities	  for	  Improved	  
Surveillance,Prevention,	  and	  Control.	  Government	  of	  Canada:	  Minister	  of	  Public	  Works	  and	  
Government	  Services	  Canada,	  1999.	  
33.	  
Kannel	  WB,	  Hjortland	  M,	  Castelli	  WP.	  Role	  of	  diabetes	  in	  congestive	  heart	  failure:	  the	  
Framingham	  study.	  Am	  J	  Cardiol.	  1974;34(1):29-­‐34.	  
34.	  
Stamler	  J,	  Vaccaro	  O,	  Neaton	  JD,	  Wentworth	  D.	  Diabetes,	  other	  risk	  factors,	  and	  12-­‐yr	  
cardiovascular	  mortality	  for	  men	  screened	  in	  the	  Multiple	  Risk	  Factor	  Intervention	  Trial.	  
Diabetes	  Care.	  1993;16(2):434-­‐44.	  
35.	  
Vanninen	  E,	  Mustonen	  J,	  Vainio	  P,	  Lansimies	  E,	  Uusitupa	  M.	  Left	  ventricular	  function	  and	  
dimensions	  in	  newly	  diagnosed	  non-­‐insulin-­‐dependent	  diabetes	  mellitus.	  Am	  J	  Cardiol.	  
1992;70(3):371-­‐8.	  
36.	  
Diamant	  M,	  Lamb	  HJ,	  Groeneveld	  Y,	  Endert	  EL,	  Smit	  JW,	  Bax	  JJ,	  et	  al.	  Diastolic	  dysfunction	  
is	  associated	  with	  altered	  myocardial	  metabolism	  in	  asymptomatic	  normotensive	  patients	  with	  
well-­‐controlled	  type	  2	  diabetes	  mellitus.	  J	  Am	  Coll	  Cardiol.	  2003;42(2):328-­‐35.	  

	  
24	  
37.	  
Taegtmeyer	  H,	  McNulty	  P,	  Young	  ME.	  Adaptation	  and	  maladaptation	  of	  the	  heart	  in	  
diabetes:	  Part	  I:	  general	  concepts.	  Circulation.	  2002;105(14):1727-­‐33.	  
38.	  
Young	  ME,	  Guthrie	  PH,	  Razeghi	  P,	  Leighton	  B,	  Abbasi	  S,	  Patil	  S,	  et	  al.	  Impaired	  long-­‐chain	  
fatty	  acid	  oxidation	  and	  contractile	  dysfunction	  in	  the	  obese	  Zucker	  rat	  heart.	  Diabetes.	  
2002;51(8):2587-­‐95.	  
39.	  
Young	  ME,	  McNulty	  P,	  Taegtmeyer	  H.	  Adaptation	  and	  maladaptation	  of	  the	  heart	  in	  
diabetes:	  Part	  II:	  potential	  mechanisms.	  Circulation.	  2002;105(15):1861-­‐70.	  
40.	  
Miettinen	  H,	  Lehto	  S,	  Salomaa	  V,	  Mahonen	  M,	  Niemela	  M,	  Haffner	  SM,	  et	  al.	  Impact	  of	  
diabetes	  on	  mortality	  after	  the	  first	  myocardial	  infarction.	  The	  FINMONICA	  Myocardial	  Infarction	  
Register	  Study	  Group.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  1998;21(1):69-­‐75.	  
41.	  
Vaccarino	  V,	  Krumholz	  HM,	  Yarzebski	  J,	  Gore	  JM,	  Goldberg	  RJ.	  Sex	  differences	  in	  2-­‐year	  
mortality	  after	  hospital	  discharge	  for	  myocardial	  infarction.	  Ann	  Intern	  Med.	  2001;134(3):173-­‐
81.	  
42.	  
McCarty	  MF.	  A	  chlorogenic	  acid-­‐induced	  increase	  in	  GLP-­‐1	  production	  may	  mediate	  the	  
impact	  of	  heavy	  coffee	  consumption	  on	  diabetes	  risk.	  Medical	  hypotheses.	  2005;64(4):848-­‐53.	  
43.	  
Chilton	  R,	  Wyatt	  J,	  Nandish	  S,	  Oliveros	  R,	  Lujan	  M.	  Cardiovascular	  comorbidities	  of	  type	  2	  
diabetes	  mellitus:	  defining	  the	  potential	  of	  glucagonlike	  peptide-­‐1-­‐based	  therapies.	  The	  American	  
journal	  of	  medicine.	  2011;124(1	  Suppl):S35-­‐53.	  
44.	  
Svilaas	  A,	  Sakhi	  AK,	  Andersen	  LF,	  Svilaas	  T,	  Strom	  EC,	  Jacobs	  DR,	  Jr.,	  et	  al.	  Intakes	  of	  
antioxidants	  in	  coffee,	  wine,	  and	  vegetables	  are	  correlated	  with	  plasma	  carotenoids	  in	  humans.	  J	  
Nutr.	  2004;134(3):562-­‐7.	  

	  
25	  
45.	  
Tunnicliffe	  JM,	  Shearer	  J.	  Coffee,	  glucose	  homeostasis,	  and	  insulin	  resistance:	  physiological	  
mechanisms	  and	  mediators.	  Appl	  Physiol	  Nutr	  Metab.	  2008;33(6):1290-­‐300.	  
46.	  
Ghule	  AE,	  Jadhav	  SS,	  Bodhankar	  SL.	  Trigonelline	  ameliorates	  diabetic	  hypertensive	  
nephropathy	  by	  suppression	  of	  oxidative	  stress	  in	  kidney	  and	  reduction	  in	  renal	  cell	  apoptosis	  
and	  fibrosis	  in	  streptozotocin	  induced	  neonatal	  diabetic	  (nSTZ)	  rats.	  International	  
immunopharmacology.	  2012;14(4):740-­‐8.	  
47.	  
Kim	  BH,	  Park	  YS,	  Noh	  HM,	  Sung	  JS,	  Lee	  JK.	  Association	  between	  Coffee	  Consumption	  and	  
Renal	  Impairment	  in	  Korean	  Women	  with	  and	  without	  Diabetes:	  Analysis	  of	  the	  Fourth	  Korea	  
National	  Health	  and	  Nutrition	  Examination	  Survey	  in	  2008.	  Korean	  journal	  of	  family	  medicine.	  
2013;34(4):265-­‐71.	  
48.	  
Nakajima	  K,	  Hirose	  K,	  Ebata	  M,	  Morita	  K,	  Munakata	  H.	  Association	  between	  habitual	  coffee	  
consumption	  and	  normal	  or	  increased	  estimated	  glomerular	  filtration	  rate	  in	  apparently	  healthy	  
adults.	  The	  British	  journal	  of	  nutrition.	  2010;103(2):149-­‐52.	  
49.	  
Kidney	  Disease	  Outcomes	  Quality	  Initiative	  (K/DOQI).	  NKF	  guidelines	  -­‐	  Goals	  of	  
antihypertensive	  therapy	  in	  CKD.	  Am	  J	  Kidney	  Dis.	  2004;43:S65-­‐S73.	  
50.	  
Beaudoin	  M-­‐S,	  Robinson	  LE,	  Graham	  TE.	  An	  oral	  lipid	  challenge	  and	  acute	  intake	  of	  
caffeinated	  coffee	  additively	  decrease	  glucose	  tolerance	  in	  healthy	  men.	  The	  Journal	  of	  nutrition.	  
2011;141(4):574-­‐81.	  
51.	  
Greenberg	  JA,	  Owen	  DR,	  Geliebter	  A.	  Decaffeinated	  coffee	  and	  glucose	  metabolism	  in	  
young	  men.	  Diabetes	  care.	  2010;33(2):278-­‐80.	  

	  
26	  
52.	  
Asarian	  L,	  Bachler	  T.	  Neuroendocrine	  control	  of	  satiation.	  Hormone	  molecular	  biology	  and	  
clinical	  investigation.	  2014;19(3):163-­‐92.	  
53.	  
Greenberg	  JA,	  Geliebter	  A.	  Coffee,	  hunger,	  and	  peptide	  YY.	  Journal	  of	  the	  American	  College	  
of	  Nutrition.	  2012;31(3):160-­‐6.	  
54.	  
Backhed	  F,	  Ding	  H,	  Wang	  T,	  Hooper	  LV,	  Koh	  GY,	  Nagy	  A,	  et	  al.	  The	  gut	  microbiota	  as	  an	  
environmental	  factor	  that	  regulates	  fat	  storage.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  U	  S	  A.	  2004;101(44):15718-­‐23.	  
55.	  
Lozupone	  CA,	  Stombaugh	  JI,	  Gordon	  JI,	  Jansson	  JK,	  Knight	  R.	  Diversity,	  stability	  and	  
resilience	  of	  the	  human	  gut	  microbiota.	  Nature.	  2012;489(7415):220-­‐30.	  
56.	  
Ley	  RE,	  Backhed	  F,	  Turnbaugh	  P,	  Lozupone	  CA,	  Knight	  RD,	  Gordon	  JI.	  Obesity	  alters	  gut	  
microbial	  ecology.	  Proc	  Natl	  Acad	  Sci	  U	  S	  A.	  2005;102(31):11070-­‐5.	  
57.	  
Bleau	  C,	  Karelis	  AD,	  St-­‐Pierre	  DH,	  Lamontagne	  L.	  Crosstalk	  between	  intestinal	  microbiota,	  
adipose	  tissue	  and	  skeletal	  muscle	  as	  an	  early	  event	  in	  systemic	  low-­‐grade	  inflammation	  and	  the	  
development	  of	  obesity	  and	  diabetes.	  Diabetes	  Metab	  Res	  Rev.	  2014.	  
58.	  
Karlsson	  FH,	  Fak	  F,	  Nookaew	  I,	  Tremaroli	  V,	  Fagerberg	  B,	  Petranovic	  D,	  et	  al.	  Symptomatic	  
atherosclerosis	  is	  associated	  with	  an	  altered	  gut	  metagenome.	  Nature	  communications.	  
2012;3:1245.	  
59.	  
Tremaroli	  V,	  Backhed	  F.	  Functional	  interactions	  between	  the	  gut	  microbiota	  and	  host	  
metabolism.	  Nature.	  2012;489(7415):242-­‐9.	  
60.	  
Cowan	  TE,	  Palmnas	  MS,	  Yang	  J,	  Bomhof	  MR,	  Ardell	  KL,	  Reimer	  RA,	  et	  al.	  Chronic	  coffee	  
consumption	  in	  the	  diet-­‐induced	  obese	  rat:	  impact	  on	  gut	  microbiota	  and	  serum	  metabolomics.	  J	  
Nutr	  Biochem.	  2014;25(4):489-­‐95.	  

	  
27	  
61.	  
Redeuil	  K,	  Smarrito-­‐Menozzi	  C,	  Guy	  P,	  Rezzi	  S,	  Dionisi	  F,	  Williamson	  G,	  et	  al.	  Identification	  
of	  novel	  circulating	  coffee	  metabolites	  in	  human	  plasma	  by	  liquid	  chromatography-­‐mass	  
spectrometry.	  J	  Chromatogr	  A.	  2011;1218(29):4678-­‐88.	  
62.	  
Moco	  S,	  Martin	  FP,	  Rezzi	  S.	  Metabolomics	  View	  on	  Gut	  Microbiome	  Modulation	  by	  
Polyphenol-­‐rich	  Foods.	  Journal	  of	  proteome	  research.	  2012;11(10):4781-­‐90.	  
63.	  
Tunnicliffe	  JM,	  Cowan	  T,	  Shearer	  J.	  Chlorogenic	  Acid	  in	  Whole	  Body	  and	  Tissue	  Specific	  
Glucose	  Regulation.	  	  .	  In:	  Preedy.	  VR,	  editor.	  Coffee	  in	  Health	  and	  Disease	  Prevention.	  Oxford,	  UK:	  
Elsevier	  Health;	  2014.	  p.	  7.	  
64.	  
Kobayashi	  Y,	  Suzuki	  M,	  Satsu	  H,	  Arai	  S,	  Hara	  Y,	  Suzuki	  K,	  et	  al.	  Green	  tea	  polyphenols	  
inhibit	  the	  sodium-­‐dependent	  glucose	  transporter	  of	  intestinal	  epithelial	  cells	  by	  a	  competitive	  
mechanism.	  J	  Agric	  Food	  Chem.	  2000;48(11):5618-­‐23.	  
65.	  
Hemmerle	  H,	  Burger	  HJ,	  Below	  P,	  Schubert	  G,	  Rippel	  R,	  Schindler	  PW,	  et	  al.	  Chlorogenic	  
acid	  and	  synthetic	  chlorogenic	  acid	  derivatives:	  novel	  inhibitors	  of	  hepatic	  glucose-­‐6-­‐phosphate	  
translocase.	  J	  Med	  Chem.	  1997;40(2):137-­‐45.	  
66.	  
Homan	  DJ,	  Mobarhan	  S.	  Coffee:	  good,	  bad,	  or	  just	  fun?	  A	  critical	  review	  of	  coffee's	  effects	  
on	  liver	  enzymes.	  Nutr	  Rev.	  2006;64(1):43-­‐6.	  
67.	  
Honjo	  S,	  Kono	  S,	  Coleman	  MP,	  Shinchi	  K,	  Sakurai	  Y,	  Todoroki	  I,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  consumption	  
and	  serum	  aminotransferases	  in	  middle-­‐aged	  Japanese	  men.	  J	  Clin	  Epidemiol.	  2001;54(8):823-­‐9.	  
68.	  
Nakanishi	  N,	  Nakamura	  K,	  Suzuki	  K,	  Tatara	  K.	  Effects	  of	  coffee	  consumption	  against	  the	  
development	  of	  liver	  dysfunction:	  a	  4-­‐year	  follow-­‐up	  study	  of	  middle-­‐aged	  Japanese	  male	  office	  
workers.	  Ind	  Health.	  2000;38(1):99-­‐102.	  

	  
28	  
69.	  
Ruhl	  CE,	  Everhart	  JE.	  Coffee	  and	  caffeine	  consumption	  reduce	  the	  risk	  of	  elevated	  serum	  
alanine	  aminotransferase	  activity	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  Gastroenterology.	  2005;128(1):24-­‐32.	  
70.	  
Shearer	  J,	  Farah	  A,	  de	  Paulis	  T,	  Bracy	  DP,	  Pencek	  RR,	  Graham	  TE,	  et	  al.	  Quinides	  of	  roasted	  
coffee	  enhance	  insulin	  action	  in	  conscious	  rats.	  J	  Nutr.	  2003;133(11):3529-­‐32.	  
71.	  
Shearer	  J,	  Sellars	  EA,	  Farah	  A,	  Graham	  TE,	  Wasserman	  DH.	  Effects	  of	  chronic	  coffee	  
consumption	  on	  glucose	  kinetics	  in	  the	  conscious	  rat.	  Can	  J	  Physiol	  Pharmacol.	  2007;85(8):823-­‐
30.	  
72.	  
Havel	  PJ.	  Control	  of	  energy	  homeostasis	  and	  insulin	  action	  by	  adipocyte	  hormones:	  leptin,	  
acylation	  stimulating	  protein,	  and	  adiponectin.	  Current	  opinion	  in	  lipidology.	  2002;13(1):51-­‐9.	  
73.	  
Snehalatha	  C,	  Mukesh	  B,	  Simon	  M,	  Viswanathan	  V,	  Haffner	  SM,	  Ramachandran	  A.	  Plasma	  
adiponectin	  is	  an	  independent	  predictor	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  in	  Asian	  indians.	  Diabetes	  care.	  
2003;26(12):3226-­‐9.	  
74.	  
Jin	  S,	  Chang	  C,	  Zhang	  L,	  Liu	  Y,	  Huang	  X,	  Chen	  Z.	  Chlorogenic	  acid	  improves	  late	  diabetes	  
through	  adiponectin	  receptor	  signaling	  pathways	  in	  db/db	  mice.	  PLoS	  One.	  
2015;10(4):e0120842.	  
75.	  
Bhaktha	  G,	  Nayak	  BS,	  Mayya	  S,	  Shantaram	  M.	  Relationship	  of	  Caffeine	  with	  Adiponectin	  
and	  Blood	  Sugar	  Levels	  in	  Subjects	  with	  and	  without	  Diabetes.	  Journal	  of	  clinical	  and	  diagnostic	  
research	  :	  JCDR.	  2015;9(1):BC01-­‐3.	  
76.	  
Kempf	  K,	  Kolb	  H,	  Gartner	  B,	  Bytof	  G,	  Stiebitz	  H,	  Lantz	  I,	  et	  al.	  Cardiometabolic	  effects	  of	  
two	  coffee	  blends	  differing	  in	  content	  for	  major	  constituents	  in	  overweight	  adults:	  a	  randomized	  
controlled	  trial.	  Eur	  J	  Nutr.	  2015;54(5):845-­‐54.	  

	  
29	  
77.	  
Gillies	  ME,	  Birkbeck	  JA.	  Tea	  and	  coffee	  as	  sources	  of	  some	  minerals	  in	  the	  New	  Zealand	  
diet.	  The	  American	  journal	  of	  clinical	  nutrition.	  1983;38(6):936-­‐42.	  
78.	  
Lopez-­‐Ridaura	  R,	  Willett	  WC,	  Rimm	  EB,	  Liu	  S,	  Stampfer	  MJ,	  Manson	  JE,	  et	  al.	  Magnesium	  
intake	  and	  risk	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  in	  men	  and	  women.	  Diabetes	  care.	  2004;27(1):134-­‐40.	  
79.	  
Hata	  A,	  Doi	  Y,	  Ninomiya	  T,	  Mukai	  N,	  Hirakawa	  Y,	  Hata	  J,	  et	  al.	  Magnesium	  intake	  decreases	  
Type	  2	  diabetes	  risk	  through	  the	  improvement	  of	  insulin	  resistance	  and	  inflammation:	  the	  
Hisayama	  Study.	  Diabetic	  medicine	  :	  a	  journal	  of	  the	  British	  Diabetic	  Association.	  
2013;30(12):1487-­‐94.	  
80.	  
Hruby	  A,	  Meigs	  JB,	  O'Donnell	  CJ,	  Jacques	  PF,	  McKeown	  NM.	  Higher	  magnesium	  intake	  
reduces	  risk	  of	  impaired	  glucose	  and	  insulin	  metabolism	  and	  progression	  from	  prediabetes	  to	  
diabetes	  in	  middle-­‐aged	  americans.	  Diabetes	  care.	  2014;37(2):419-­‐27.	  
81.	  
Minamisawa	  M,	  Yoshida	  S,	  Takai	  N.	  Determination	  of	  biologically	  active	  substances	  in	  
roasted	  coffees	  using	  a	  diode-­‐array	  HPLC	  system.	  Analytical	  sciences	  :	  the	  international	  journal	  of	  
the	  Japan	  Society	  for	  Analytical	  Chemistry.	  2004;20(2):325-­‐8.	  
82.	  
Zhou	  JY,	  Zhou	  SW.	  Protection	  of	  trigonelline	  on	  experimental	  diabetic	  peripheral	  
neuropathy.	  Evidence-­‐based	  complementary	  and	  alternative	  medicine	  :	  eCAM.	  
2012;2012:164219.	  
83.	  
Hamden	  K,	  Bengara	  A,	  Amri	  Z,	  Elfeki	  A.	  Experimental	  diabetes	  treated	  with	  trigonelline:	  
effect	  on	  key	  enzymes	  related	  to	  diabetes	  and	  hypertension,	  beta-­‐cell	  and	  liver	  function.	  
Molecular	  and	  cellular	  biochemistry.	  2013;381(1-­‐2):85-­‐94.	  

	  
30	  
84.	  
Olthof	  MR,	  van	  Dijk	  AE,	  Deacon	  CF,	  Heine	  RJ,	  van	  Dam	  RM.	  Acute	  effects	  of	  decaffeinated	  
coffee	  and	  the	  major	  coffee	  components	  chlorogenic	  acid	  and	  trigonelline	  on	  incretin	  hormones.	  
Nutr	  Metab	  (Lond).	  2011;8:10.	  
85.	  
Lampropoulou	  I-­‐T,	  Stangou	  M,	  Papagianni	  A,	  Didangelos	  T,	  Iliadis	  F,	  Efstratiadis	  G.	  TNF-­‐
&#x3b1;	  and	  Microalbuminuria	  in	  Patients	  with	  Type	  2	  Diabetes	  Mellitus.	  Journal	  of	  Diabetes	  
Research.	  2014;2014:7.	  
86.	  
Yamauchi	  R,	  Kobayashi	  M,	  Matsuda	  Y,	  Ojika	  M,	  Shigeoka	  S,	  Yamamoto	  Y,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  and	  
caffeine	  ameliorate	  hyperglycemia,	  fatty	  liver,	  and	  inflammatory	  adipocytokine	  expression	  in	  
spontaneously	  diabetic	  KK-­‐Ay	  mice.	  Journal	  of	  agricultural	  and	  food	  chemistry.	  2010;58(9):5597-­‐
603.	  
87.	  
Ruderman	  NB,	  Carling	  D,	  Prentki	  M,	  Cacicedo	  JM.	  AMPK,	  insulin	  resistance,	  and	  the	  
metabolic	  syndrome.	  The	  Journal	  of	  clinical	  investigation.	  2013;123(7):2764.	  
88.	  
Ong	  KW,	  Hsu	  A,	  Tan	  B.	  Chlorogenic	  acid	  stimulates	  glucose	  transport	  in	  skeletal	  muscle	  via	  
AMPK	  activation:	  a	  contributor	  to	  the	  beneficial	  effects	  of	  coffee	  on	  diabetes.	  PloS	  one.	  
2012;7(3):e32718.	  
89.	  
Shearer	  J,	  Graham	  TE.	  Caffeine	  and	  Caffeinated	  Energy	  Drink	  Consumption:	  A	  Systematic	  
Review	  of	  Performance	  and	  Metabolic	  Consequences	  on	  Glucose	  Disposal.	  Nutrition	  Reviews.	  
2014;72	  (1:121-­‐36.).	  
90.	  
Shearer	  J.	  Caffeine	  containing	  energy	  drinks:	  methodological	  considerations	  and	  impact	  
on	  the	  gastrointestinal	  system,	  liver	  and	  metabolic	  health.	  Nutrition	  Reviews.	  2014;In	  
Press(NUTR-­‐REV-­‐038-­‐SUPPL-­‐02-­‐2014.R1).	  

	  
31	  
91.	  
Beaudoin	  MS,	  Allen	  B,	  Mazzetti	  G,	  Sullivan	  PJ,	  Graham	  TE.	  Caffeine	  ingestion	  impairs	  
insulin	  sensitivity	  in	  a	  dose-­‐dependent	  manner	  in	  both	  men	  and	  women.	  Appl	  Physiol	  Nutr	  Metab.	  
2013;38(2):140-­‐7.	  
92.	  
Robinson	  LE,	  Spafford	  C,	  Graham	  TE,	  Smith	  GN.	  Acute	  caffeine	  ingestion	  and	  glucose	  
tolerance	  in	  women	  with	  or	  without	  gestational	  diabetes	  mellitus.	  Journal	  of	  obstetrics	  and	  
gynaecology	  Canada	  :	  JOGC	  =	  Journal	  d'obstetrique	  et	  gynecologie	  du	  Canada	  :	  JOGC.	  
2009;31(4):304-­‐12.	  
93.	  
Dekker	  MJ,	  Gusba	  JE,	  Robinson	  LE,	  Graham	  TE.	  Glucose	  homeostasis	  remains	  altered	  by	  
acute	  caffeine	  ingestion	  following	  2	  weeks	  of	  daily	  caffeine	  consumption	  in	  previously	  non-­‐
caffeine-­‐consuming	  males.	  Br	  J	  Nutr.	  2007;98(3):556-­‐62.	  
94.	  
Battram	  DS,	  Arthur	  R,	  Weekes	  A,	  Graham	  TE.	  The	  glucose	  intolerance	  induced	  by	  
caffeinated	  coffee	  ingestion	  is	  less	  pronounced	  than	  that	  due	  to	  alkaloid	  caffeine	  in	  men.	  J	  Nutr.	  
2006;136(5):1276-­‐80.	  
95.	  
Lee	  S,	  Hudson	  R,	  Kilpatrick	  K,	  Graham	  TE,	  Ross	  R.	  Caffeine	  ingestion	  is	  associated	  with	  
reductions	  in	  glucose	  uptake	  independent	  of	  obesity	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes	  before	  and	  after	  
exercise	  training.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  2005;28(3):566-­‐72.	  
96.	  
Robinson	  LE,	  Savani	  S,	  Battram	  DS,	  McLaren	  DH,	  Sathasivam	  P,	  Graham	  TE.	  Caffeine	  
ingestion	  before	  an	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test	  impairs	  blood	  glucose	  management	  in	  men	  with	  
type	  2	  diabetes.	  J	  Nutr.	  2004;134(10):2528-­‐33.	  
97.	  
Battram	  D,	  Arthur	  R,	  Weindruch	  R,	  Graham	  TE.	  Impaired	  response	  to	  an	  oral	  glucose	  
tolerance	  test	  following	  ingestion	  of	  caffeine	  in	  alkaloid	  form	  or	  as	  a	  component	  of	  coffee.	  Can	  J	  
Appl	  Physiol.	  2000(93):T147.	  

	  
32	  
98.	  
Thong	  FS,	  Derave	  W,	  Kiens	  B,	  Graham	  TE,	  Urso	  B,	  Wojtaszewski	  JF,	  et	  al.	  Caffeine-­‐induced	  
impairment	  of	  insulin	  action	  but	  not	  insulin	  signaling	  in	  human	  skeletal	  muscle	  is	  reduced	  by	  
exercise.	  Diabetes.	  2002;51(3):583-­‐90.	  
99.	  
Chown	  S,	  Petrie	  H,	  Duncan	  A,	  Battram	  DB,	  Belfie	  L,	  Conquer	  J,	  et	  al.	  Caffeine	  increases	  the	  
insulin/glucose	  response	  to	  an	  OGTT	  in	  obese,	  resting	  males.	  Can	  J	  Appl	  Physiol.	  2001;26	  
(suppl):S249.	  
100.	  
Keijzers	  GB,	  Tack	  CJ,	  De	  Galan	  BE,	  Smits	  P.	  Caffeine	  can	  decrease	  insulin	  sensitivity	  in	  
humans.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  2002;25(2):364-­‐9.	  
101.	  
Greer	  F,	  Hudson	  R,	  Ross	  R,	  Graham	  T.	  Caffeine	  ingestion	  decreases	  glucose	  disposal	  during	  
a	  hyperinsulinemic-­‐	  euglycemic	  clamp	  in	  sedentary	  humans.	  Diabetes.	  2001;50(10):2349-­‐54.	  
102.	  
Hammami	  MM,	  Al-­‐Gaai	  EA,	  Alvi	  S,	  Hammami	  MB.	  Interaction	  between	  drug	  and	  placebo	  
effects:	  a	  cross-­‐over	  balanced	  placebo	  design	  trial.	  Trials.	  2010;11:110.	  
103.	  
Gordish-­‐Dressman	  H,	  Devaney	  JM.	  Statistical	  and	  Methodological	  Considerations	  
in	  Exercise	  Genomics.	  In:	  Pescatello	  LS,	  Roth	  SM,	  editors.	  Molecular	  and	  Translational	  Medicine	  
Springer	  Science	  +	  Business	  Media;	  2011.	  p.	  23-­‐43.	  
104.	  
Cornelis	  MC,	  El-­‐Sohemy	  A,	  Kabagambe	  EK,	  Campos	  H.	  Coffee,	  CYP1A2	  genotype,	  and	  risk	  
of	  myocardial	  infarction.	  JAMA.	  2006;295(10):1135-­‐41.	  
105.	  
Cornelis	  MC,	  Monda	  KL,	  Yu	  K,	  Paynter	  N,	  Azzato	  EM,	  Bennett	  SN,	  et	  al.	  Genome-­‐wide	  meta-­‐
analysis	  identifies	  regions	  on	  7p21	  (AHR)	  and	  15q24	  (CYP1A2)	  as	  determinants	  of	  habitual	  
caffeine	  consumption.	  PLoS	  Genet.	  2011;7(4):e1002033.	  

	  
33	  
106.	  
Rogers	  PJ,	  Hohoff	  C,	  Heatherley	  SV,	  Mullings	  EL,	  Maxfield	  PJ,	  Evershed	  RP,	  et	  al.	  
Association	  of	  the	  anxiogenic	  and	  alerting	  effects	  of	  caffeine	  with	  ADORA2A	  and	  ADORA1	  
polymorphisms	  and	  habitual	  level	  of	  caffeine	  consumption.	  Neuropsychopharmacology.	  
2010;35(9):1973-­‐83.	  
107.	  
Thom	  E.	  The	  effect	  of	  chlorogenic	  acid	  enriched	  coffee	  on	  glucose	  absorption	  in	  healthy	  
volunteers	  and	  its	  effect	  on	  body	  mass	  when	  used	  long-­‐term	  in	  overweight	  and	  obese	  people.	  J	  
Int	  Med	  Res.	  2007;35(6):900-­‐8.	  
108.	  
Dellalibera	  O,	  Lemaire	  B,	  Lafay	  S.	  Svetol,	  green	  coffee	  extract,	  induces	  weight	  loss	  and	  
increases	  the	  lean	  to	  fat	  mass	  ratio	  in	  volunteers	  with	  overweight	  problem.	  Phytotherapie.	  
2006;4(4):194-­‐7.	  
109.	  
Varghese	  M,	  Ho	  L,	  Wang	  J,	  Zhao	  W,	  Levine	  S,	  Ono	  K,	  et	  al.	  Green	  coffee	  as	  a	  novel	  agent	  for	  
Alzheimer’s	  disease	  prevention	  by	  attenuating	  diabetes.	  Translational	  Neuroscience.	  
2014;5(2):111-­‐6.	  
110.	  
Flanagan	  J,	  Bily	  A,	  Rolland	  Y,	  Roller	  M.	  Lipolytic	  activity	  of	  Svetol®,	  a	  decaffeinated	  green	  
coffee	  bean	  extract.	  Phytotherapy	  Research.	  2014;28(6):946-­‐8.	  
111.	  
Tunnicliffe	  JM,	  Eller	  LK,	  Reimer	  RA,	  Hittel	  DS,	  Shearer	  J.	  Chlorogenic	  acid	  differentially	  
affects	  postprandial	  glucose	  and	  glucose-­‐dependent	  insulinotropic	  polypeptide	  response	  in	  rats.	  
Appl	  Physiol	  Nutr	  Metab.	  2011;36(5):650-­‐9.	  
112.	  
Bassoli	  BK,	  Cassolla	  P,	  Borba-­‐Murad	  GR,	  Constantin	  J,	  Salgueiro-­‐Pagadigorria	  CL,	  Bazotte	  
RB,	  et	  al.	  Chlorogenic	  acid	  reduces	  the	  plasma	  glucose	  peak	  in	  the	  oral	  glucose	  tolerance	  test:	  
effects	  on	  hepatic	  glucose	  release	  and	  glycaemia.	  Cell	  Biochem	  Funct.	  2007.	  

	  
34	  
113.	  
Henry-­‐Vitrac	  C,	  Ibarra	  A,	  Roller	  M,	  Merillon	  JM,	  Vitrac	  X.	  Contribution	  of	  chlorogenic	  acids	  
to	  the	  inhibition	  of	  human	  hepatic	  glucose-­‐6-­‐phosphatase	  activity	  in	  vitro	  by	  Svetol,	  a	  
standardized	  decaffeinated	  green	  coffee	  extract.	  J	  Agric	  Food	  Chem.58(7):4141-­‐4.	  
114.	  
van	  Dijk	  AE,	  Olthof	  MR,	  Meeuse	  JC,	  Seebus	  E,	  Heine	  RJ,	  van	  Dam	  RM.	  Acute	  effects	  of	  
decaffeinated	  coffee	  and	  the	  major	  coffee	  components	  chlorogenic	  acid	  and	  trigonelline	  on	  
glucose	  tolerance.	  Diabetes	  Care.	  2009;32(6):1023-­‐5.	  
115.	  
Wu	  X,	  Skog	  K,	  Jagerstad	  M.	  Trigonelline,	  a	  naturally	  occurring	  constituent	  of	  green	  coffee	  
beans	  behind	  the	  mutagenic	  activity	  of	  roasted	  coffee?	  Mutat	  Res.	  1997;391(3):171-­‐7.	  
116.	  
Kempf	  K,	  Herder	  C,	  Erlund	  I,	  Kolb	  H,	  Martin	  S,	  Carstensen	  M,	  et	  al.	  Effects	  of	  coffee	  
consumption	  on	  subclinical	  inflammation	  and	  other	  risk	  factors	  for	  type	  2	  diabetes:	  a	  clinical	  trial.	  
Am	  J	  Clin	  Nutr.	  2010;91(4):950-­‐7.	  
117.	  
Jia	  H,	  Aw	  W,	  Egashira	  K,	  Takahashi	  S,	  Aoyama	  S,	  Saito	  K,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  intake	  mitigated	  
inflammation	  and	  obesity-­‐induced	  insulin	  resistance	  in	  skeletal	  muscle	  of	  high-­‐fat	  diet-­‐induced	  
obese	  mice.	  Genes	  &	  nutrition.	  2014;9(3):389.	  
118.	  
Zampelas	  A,	  Panagiotakos	  DB,	  Pitsavos	  C,	  Chrysohoou	  C,	  Stefanadis	  C.	  Associations	  
between	  coffee	  consumption	  and	  inflammatory	  markers	  in	  healthy	  persons:	  the	  ATTICA	  study.	  
Am	  J	  Clin	  Nutr.	  2004;80(4):862-­‐7.	  
119.	  
Ong	  KW,	  Hsu	  A,	  Tan	  BK.	  Chlorogenic	  acid	  stimulates	  glucose	  transport	  in	  skeletal	  muscle	  
via	  AMPK	  activation:	  a	  contributor	  to	  the	  beneficial	  effects	  of	  coffee	  on	  diabetes.	  PLoS	  One.	  
2012;7(3):e32718.	  

	  
35	  
120.	  
Aoyagi	  R,	  Funakoshi-­‐Tago	  M,	  Fujiwara	  Y,	  Tamura	  H.	  Coffee	  inhibits	  adipocyte	  
differentiation	  via	  inactivation	  of	  PPARgamma.	  Biological	  &	  pharmaceutical	  bulletin.	  
2014;37(11):1820-­‐5.	  
121.	  
Wu	  T,	  Willett	  WC,	  Hankinson	  SE,	  Giovannucci	  E.	  Caffeinated	  coffee,	  decaffeinated	  coffee,	  
and	  caffeine	  in	  relation	  to	  plasma	  C-­‐peptide	  levels,	  a	  marker	  of	  insulin	  secretion,	  in	  U.S.	  women.	  
Diabetes	  Care.	  2005;28(6):1390-­‐6.	  
122.	  
Yamaji	  T,	  Mizoue	  T,	  Tabata	  S,	  Ogawa	  S,	  Yamaguchi	  K,	  Shimizu	  E,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  consumption	  
and	  glucose	  tolerance	  status	  in	  middle-­‐aged	  Japanese	  men.	  Diabetologia.	  2004;47(12):2145-­‐51.	  
123.	  
Zhang	  Y,	  Lee	  ET,	  Cowan	  LD,	  Fabsitz	  RR,	  Howard	  BV.	  Coffee	  consumption	  and	  the	  incidence	  
of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  in	  men	  and	  women	  with	  normal	  glucose	  tolerance:	  the	  Strong	  Heart	  Study.	  
Nutr	  Metab	  Cardiovasc	  Dis.	  2011;21(6):418-­‐23.	  
124.	  
Tsuda	  S,	  Egawa	  T,	  Ma	  X,	  Oshima	  R,	  Kurogi	  E,	  Hayashi	  T.	  Coffee	  polyphenol	  caffeic	  acid	  but	  
not	  chlorogenic	  acid	  increases	  5'AMP-­‐activated	  protein	  kinase	  and	  insulin-­‐independent	  glucose	  
transport	  in	  rat	  skeletal	  muscle.	  J	  Nutr	  Biochem.23(11):1403-­‐9.	  
125.	  
Johnston	  KL,	  Clifford	  MN,	  Morgan	  LM.	  Coffee	  acutely	  modifies	  gastrointestinal	  hormone	  
secretion	  and	  glucose	  tolerance	  in	  humans:	  glycemic	  effects	  of	  chlorogenic	  acid	  and	  caffeine.	  Am	  J	  
Clin	  Nutr.	  2003;78(4):728-­‐33.	  
126.	  
Welsch	  CA,	  Lachance	  PA,	  Wasserman	  BP.	  Dietary	  phenolic	  compounds:	  inhibition	  of	  Na+-­‐
dependent	  D-­‐glucose	  uptake	  in	  rat	  intestinal	  brush	  border	  membrane	  vesicles.	  J	  Nutr.	  
1989;119(11):1698-­‐704.	  

	  
36	  
127.	  
Pencek	  RR,	  Battram	  D,	  Shearer	  J,	  James	  FD,	  Lacy	  DB,	  Jabbour	  K,	  et	  al.	  Portal	  vein	  caffeine	  
infusion	  enhances	  net	  hepatic	  glucose	  uptake	  during	  a	  glucose	  load	  in	  conscious	  dogs.	  J	  Nutr.	  
2004;134(11):3042-­‐6.	  
128.	  
Tanaka	  K,	  Tokunaga	  S,	  Kono	  S,	  Tokudome	  S,	  Akamatsu	  T,	  Moriyama	  T,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  
consumption	  and	  decreased	  serum	  gamma-­‐glutamyltransferase	  and	  aminotransferase	  activities	  
among	  male	  alcohol	  drinkers.	  International	  journal	  of	  epidemiology.	  1998;27(3):438-­‐43.	  
129.	  
Goto	  A,	  Song	  Y,	  Chen	  BH,	  Manson	  JE,	  Buring	  JE,	  Liu	  S.	  Coffee	  and	  caffeine	  consumption	  in	  
relation	  to	  sex	  hormone-­‐binding	  globulin	  and	  risk	  of	  type	  2	  diabetes	  in	  postmenopausal	  women.	  
Diabetes.	  2011;60(1):269-­‐75.	  
130.	  
Yamauchi	  R,	  Kobayashi	  M,	  Matsuda	  Y,	  Ojika	  M,	  Shigeoka	  S,	  Yamamoto	  Y,	  et	  al.	  Coffee	  and	  
caffeine	  ameliorate	  hyperglycemia,	  fatty	  liver,	  and	  inflammatory	  adipocytokine	  expression	  in	  
spontaneously	  diabetic	  KK-­‐Ay	  mice.	  J	  Agric	  Food	  Chem.	  2010;58(9):5597-­‐603.	  
131.	  
Nakabayashi	  H,	  Hashimoto	  T,	  Ashida	  H,	  Nishiumi	  S,	  Kanazawa	  K.	  Inhibitory	  effects	  of	  
caffeine	  and	  its	  metabolites	  on	  intracellular	  lipid	  accumulation	  in	  murine	  3T3-­‐L1	  adipocytes.	  
Biofactors.	  2008;34(4):293-­‐302.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
37	  
Figure	  and	  Table	  Captions	  
Figure	  1.	  Relationship	  between	  coffee	  intake	  (cups	  per	  day,	  x-­‐axis),	  odds	  ratios	  (obesity	  and	  
metabolic	  syndrome)	  and	  hazard	  ratio	  (type	  2	  diabetes)	  for	  each	  respective	  state.	  Data	  for	  all	  
three	  states	  (obesity,	  metabolic	  syndrome	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes)	  are	  plotted	  on	  the	  same	  graph	  for	  
comparison	  purposes.	  Data	  in	  the	  figure	  was	  adapted	  from	  Nordestgaard	  et	  al.19	  Coffee	  intake	  
and	  risk	  of	  obesity,	  metabolic	  syndrome	  and	  type	  2	  diabetes:	  a	  Mendelian	  randomization	  study.	  
International	  journal	  of	  epidemiology.	  2015;44(2):551-­‐65.	  Odds	  and	  hazard	  ratios	  were	  
multivariable	  adjusted	  for	  age,	  sex,	  smoking	  status,	  physical	  inactivity	  and	  use	  of	  
antihypertensive	  and	  lipid-­‐lowering	  medication.	  	  
	  
Table	  1.	  	  Single	  nucleotide	  polymorphisms	  associated	  with	  either	  caffeine/coffee	  consumption	  	  
or	  the	  responses	  to	  consumption.	  Data	  was	  obtained	  by	  searching	  ‘caffeine’;	  ‘coffee’;	  or	  ‘caffeine	  
consumption’	  on	  SNPedia	  (www.snpedia.com).	  Each	  variant,	  site,	  role	  and	  global	  minor	  allele	  
frequency	  (GMAF)	  is	  shown	  along	  with	  a	  reference	  to	  the	  source	  data.	  The	  GMAF	  represents	  the	  
prevalence	  of	  the	  minor	  allele	  in	  the	  population.	  For	  example,	  given	  the	  distribution	  AA,	  AT,	  TT	  
(sample	  genotypes).	  The	  minor	  allele	  frequency	  of	  TT	  of	  0.15	  (major	  allele	  frequency	  of	  0.85	  for	  
AA),	  the	  expected	  genotype	  distribution	  for	  100	  individuals	  is	  as	  follows;	  AA=72,	  AT=26,	  TT=2.	  In	  
other	  words,	  only	  two	  individuals	  out	  of	  every	  100	  would	  have	  a	  homozygous	  mutant	  genotype	  
with	  a	  frequency	  of	  0.15,	  a	  rare	  trait.	  (Source	  is	  Gordish-­‐Dressman103).	  
	  
Table	  2.	  Potential	  mechanisms	  and/or	  signalling	  cascades	  affected	  by	  which	  chronic	  coffee	  
consumption.	  	  Such	  mechanism	  may	  be	  involved	  in	  mediating	  the	  protective	  effects	  of	  coffee	  
consumption	  on	  type	  2	  diabetes,	  obesity	  and	  the	  metabolic	  syndrome.	  The	  mechanisms	  and	  
selected	  referenced	  are	  shown.	  	  

	  
38	  
TABLE	  1	  
 
SNP & Reference 
Role 
Case 
GMAF 
Expected Genotypes (n=100) 
rs762551104 
P450 1A2 (CYP1A2)  
Caffeine 
metabolism 
0.352 
13   (CC) – slow metabolism 
46   (AC) – slow metabolism 
42   (AA) – fast metabolism 
rs4410790105 
AHR, regulator of 
CYP1A2 
Caffeine 
consumption 
0.489 
24   (CC) – consume less 
50   (CT) – consume more 
26   (TT) – consume more 
rs69688657 
AHR, regulator of 
CYP1A2 
Caffeine 
consumption 
0.479 
23   (AA) – lower consumption 
50   (AT) – increased consumption 
28   (TT) – increased consumption 
rs575187615 
ADORA2A 
Adenosine 
receptor 
0.481 
23   (CC) – no effect 
51   (CT) – no effect 
26   (TT)  – caffeine-induced anxiety 
 
rs6495122105  
 
Intergenic region 
CPLX3/ULK3/ 
CYP1A2 
Caffeine 
consumption 
0.352 
52    (AA) – decreased consumption 
36    (AC) – decreased consumption 
13    (CC) – higher consumption 
 
rs12148488105 
 
SCAMP5, PDCDC 
Caffeine 
consumption 
0.410 
18    (GG) – higher consumption 
46    (GT) – decreased consumption 
37    (TT) – decreased consumption 
 
rs3761422106 
 
ADORA2A 
Adenosine 
receptor 
0.380 
37    (CC) – no effect 
48    (CT) – no effect 
16    (TT) – caffeine-induced anxiety 
 
rs2472304105 
 
CYP1A2 
Caffeine 
consumption 
0.321 
10    (AA) – increased consumption 
26    (AG) – increased consumption 
64    (GG) – lower consumption 
 
	  
	  
	  

	  
39	  
TABLE	  2	  
Proposed	  Mechanism	  Mediating	  Type	  2	  Diabetes	  Reduction	  
Reference(s)	  
Reduced	  Appetite/Caloric	  Consumption	  
107-­‐110	  
Increased	  Micronutrient	  Consumption	  (e.g.	  Magnesium)	  
77-­‐80	  
Increased	  Antioxidant	  Consumption	  (Chlorogenic	  acid,	  Quinides)	  
70,	  111-­‐113	  
Coffee	  Specific	  Compounds	  (e.g.	  Trigonelline)	  
46,	  82-­‐84,	  114,	  115	  
Inflammatory	  Modulation	  (e.g.	  Adipokines)	  
74,	  75,	  116-­‐118	  	  
Glucose	  Regulation	  (e.g.	  AMPK	  Signalling);	  Insulin	  Secretion/Action	  
45,	  70,	  94,	  119-­‐124	  
Gut	  Peptide	  Secretion	  (e.g.	  GLP-­‐1);	  Gut	  Microbiota;	  Nutrient	  Absorption	  
(e.g.	  Sodium	  Dependent	  Glucose	  Transporter).	  
51,	  60,	  84,	  125,	  126	  	  
Hepatic	  Function	  (Hepatic	  Glucose	  Kinetics	  (e.g.	  G-­‐6-­‐P)	  	  
66-­‐69,	  127,	  128	  
Other	  Signalling	  (e.g.	  Sex	  Hormone	  Binding	  Globulin)	  
129	  
Adipocyte	  Differentiation,	  Adipose	  Synthesis/Catabolism	  
120,	  130,	  131	  
	  
	  

	  
22	  
Figure	  1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
0.4	  
0.5	  
0.6	  
0.7	  
0.8	  
0.9	  
1.0	  
1.1	  
0.0	  
1.0	  
2.0	  
3.0	  
4.0	  
5.0	  
6.0	  
Obesity	  
Metabolic	  Syndrome	  
Type	  2	  Diabetes	  
0.1-­‐1.0	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1.1-­‐2.0	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2.1-­‐3.0	  	  	  	  	  	  3.1-­‐4.0	  	  	  	  	  4.1-­‐5.0	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5+	  	  	  	  
	  
Coffee	  intake	  (cups/day)	  
Odds/Hazard	  Ratio	   	    
