935
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1043: 935 (2005). © 2005 New York Academy of Sciences.
doi: 10.1196/annals.1333.149
Identification of N-Methylpyridinium as a Key 
Chemopreventive Compound and a RAGE 
Ligand in Coffee Beverage Using in Vitro and
in Vivo Techniques
V. SOMOZA,a M. LINDENMEIER,b E. WENZEL,a O. FRANK,c S. BEK,d
J. HUBER,d B. WEIGLE,d S. SCHEIDLER,d A. E. BUSCH,d H. F. ERBERSDOBLER,e 
AND T. HOFMANNc
aGerman Research Center of Food Chemistry and bTechnical University of Munich, 
Garching, Germany
cUniversity of Muenster, Muenster, Germany
dAventis Pharma Germany GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany
eUniversity of Kiel, Kiel, Germany
An activity-guided screening procedure was applied to coffee brew in order to iden-
tify a key chemopreventive compound by means of in vitro antioxidant tests, as well
as cell culture experiments, and to prove the in vivo activity of that compound by an
animal feeding experiment. Solvent fractionation, followed by multiple-step ultra-
filtration revealed that the polar coffee compounds with molecular weights <1 kDa
show the major inhibitory effect on the in vitro peroxidation of linoleic acid as well
as the predominant chemopreventive enzyme modulating activity on the NADPH-
cytochrome c–reductase and glutathione-S-transferase (GST) in human intestinal
Caco-2 cells. To identify the chemical structure of the most active compounds, the
polar compounds were further separated by HPLC techniques, followed by the ac-
tivity-guided screening of the individual HPLC fraction. These experiments demon-
strated the 5-chlorogenic acid as the most powerful antioxidant in vitro; whereas,
chemopreventive effects on the GST activity were found for N-methyl pyridinium
ions, the structure of which was elucidated by LC/MS and NMR experiments and
confirmed by synthesis. The in vivo activity of coffee beverage and N-methyl-
pyridinium ions were tested in a 15-day feeding experiment on rats. In the liver, feed-
ing of 4.5% coffee beverage resulted in an increase of GST and UDP-GT activity by
24% and 40% when compared to animals fed the control diet (P > 0.05), respective-
ly. In the plasma, total antioxidant capacity, the contents of tocopherol, and those of
advanced glycation end products (AGEs) were elevated in animals fed the coffee
beverage and the N-methylpyridinium-containing diet. The elevated levels of AGEs
were not associated with decreased levels of antioxidants, although a pro-oxidative
effect of coffee beverage and the N-methylpyridinium was indicated by the results
from in vitro experiments in which their binding to the receptor of AGEs (RAGE)
was demonstrated. In summary, the data indicate a strong antioxidant and chemopre-
ventive effect of coffee beverage and N-methylpyridinium.
e-mail address for correspondence: veronika.somoza@lrz.tum.de
