 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1300 OHS RTW (647 789) 
www.rrp.com.au 
DEFINITIONS 
TASK ANALYSIS 
Definitions 
Task can be defined by their physical demand level, frequency and activity level. 
Physical Demand Characteristics of Work 
(United States Department of Labour, 1991) 
Physical Demand Level 
Occasional 
(6-33% Work Day) 
Frequent 
(34-66% Work Day) 
Constant 
(67-100% Work Day) 
Sedentary 
5kg 
Insignificant 
Insignificant 
Light 
5 - 10kg 
5kg 
Insignificant 
Medium 
10 - 25kg 
5 - 10kg 
5kg 
Heavy 
25 - 50kg 
10 - 25kg 
5 - 10kg 
Very Heavy 
Over 50kg 
Over 25kg 
Over 10kg 
 
Further description is provided on each category below 
(Reference - US Department of Labour’s “Dictionary of Occupational Titles”). 
 
FREQUENCY 
Rare 
The activity or posture exists 0-5% of the task time. 
Occasionally 
The activity or posture exists 6-33% of the task time. 
Frequently 
The activity or posture exists from 34 – 66% of the task time. 
Constant 
The activity or condition exists 67 – 100% of the task time. 
 
ACTIVITY LEVELS 
Static 
The staff member maintains a stationary posture. 
Repetitive 
The staff member completes similar work cycles with the same body movements 
and actions, (same muscles used continuously). 
Work is considered repetitive when: 
• 
the duration of a work cycle if less than 30 seconds 
• 
a fundamental activity in the work cycle is repeated for more than 50% of the 
cycle time 
• 
the movements must be performed continuously for a minimum of 60 minutes 
Used when referring to any physical demand i.e., lifting, mobility or posture 
that is significantly repeated as defined above. 
Intermittent 
The staff member completes a physical demand that is repeated but with 
significant intervals between repetitions. 
Sustained 
The staff member maintains postures for a prolonged period of time, for example, 
sitting at a computer chair continuously (which would also be static). The Physical 
Demand of a computer based tasks would be “Sustained sitting.” 
The staff member completes prolonged dynamic actions/mobility, e.g. 
walking. Used interchangeably with prolonged. 
Intensive 
Refers to the scale or extent of effort. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1300 OHS RTW (647 789) 
www.rrp.com.au 
DEFINITIONS 
TASK ANALYSIS 
Sedentary 
Applying an insignificant amount of force frequently to lift, carry, push, pull or otherwise move 
objects, including human body weight, or up to 5kg of force occasionally. Sedentary work requires 
predominantly sitting, but can entail walking or standing for short periods of time. Jobs are 
Sedentary if walking and standing are required only on an occasionally basis and all other sedentary 
criteria is adhered to. 
 
Light Work 
Exerting up to 5kg of force frequently, up to 10kg of force occasionally, or an insignificant amount 
of force constantly to handle objects. Physical requirements are greater than those for Sedentary 
Work. Even though the weight lifted may be only an insignificant amount, a job should be rated Light 
Work: 
1. When standing or walking is completed to a significant degree; or 
2. When sitting is mostly completed although required pushing or pulling of arm/leg controls; 
or 
3. When the task is completed at production rate pace (repetitive movement and actions) 
requiring the constant handling, pushing/pulling of objects even though the weight of those 
objects is insignificant. 
 
Medium Work 
1. Exerting 10kg to 25kg of force occasionally, or 5kg to 10kg of force frequently, or up to 5kg 
of force constantly to handle objects. Physical requirements of these tasks are greater than 
those of Light Work. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1300 OHS RTW (647 789) 
www.rrp.com.au 
DEFINITIONS 
TASK ANALYSIS 
Heavy Work 
Exerting 25 – 50kg of force occasionally, or 10 – 25 kg of force frequently, or 5 -10kg of force 
constantly to move objects. Physical requirements of these tasks are greater than those of Medium 
Work. 
 
Very Heavy Work 
Exerting in excess 50kg of force occasionally, or in excess of 25kg of force frequently, or in excess of 
10kg of force constantly to move objects. Physical requirements of these tasks are greater than 
those of Heavy Work. 
 
 
 
 
 
