 
 
The Potential for Biochar to Improve Sustainability 
in Coffee Cultivation and Processing:   
A White Paper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written by: 
Kathleen Draper, Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence 
 
October 2018 
 
 
 
 
This white paper was updated from a 2015 white paper of the same title.  Financial support for 
updating was provided to the International Biochar Initiative from the Biochar for Sustainable 
Soils Project. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this white paper may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and retrieval system 
without written permission from the authors and publisher, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a 
review. Copyright © 2018 Ithaka Institute and International Biochar Initiative 
For further information please contact: draper@ithaka-institut.org  

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
2 | P a g e  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................ 3 
THE COFFEE GROWING CHALLENGE ............................................................................................ 4 
BENEFITS OF PRODUCTION & USE OF BIOCHAR FOR COFFEE PRODUCTION ................................ 6 
Soil Amendment ...................................................................................................................... 7 
Disease Management .............................................................................................................. 8 
Composting ............................................................................................................................. 9 
Filtration ................................................................................................................................ 10 
Energy Production ................................................................................................................. 11 
Biochar from Coffee Residues ................................................................................................ 12 
Biochar Production Technologies and Co-products................................................................ 17 
Decarbonization Pathways Using Biochar .............................................................................. 18 
ECONOMICS OF BIOCHAR USE IN COFFEE PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING .............................. 20 
New Revenue Streams ........................................................................................................... 21 
COFFEE AND BIOCHAR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS ................................................................ 21 
Brazil: Fazenda da Lagoa, NKG Tropical Management ............................................................ 22 
Peru: The Biochar for Sustainable Soils (B4SS) Project ........................................................... 23 
China: Yunnan Coffee Traders................................................................................................ 24 
Colombia: LaPalma Y El Tucan Coffee Farm ........................................................................... 24 
Tanzania: Black Earth Project ............................................................................................. 25 
Laos: Jhai Coffee House ......................................................................................................... 26 
Uganda: NKG Tropical Farm management (Neumann Kaffee Gruppe) ................................... 27 
Ethiopia: The Biochar for Sustainable Soils (B4SS) Project ...................................................... 28 
Vietnam: Minimization of Industrial Waste for Low Carbon Production ................................. 29 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH ...................................................................................... 30 
Education on the Benefits of Biochar & Biochar Production .................................................. 31 
Cost Benefit Analysis Templates ............................................................................................ 31 
On-going coordination amongst coffee and biochar projects ................................................ 32 
Demonstrations of biochar & Biochar Production within the Coffee industry ........................ 32 
Optimizing Biochar in Coffee Compost .................................................................................. 32 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
3 | P a g e  
 
Quantification of carbon reductions using biochar ................................................................ 33 
CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................... 34 
THE AUTHOR ........................................................................................................................... 34 
REFERENCES .............................................................................................................................. 34 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
As the security of the coffee supply is threatened by climate change and other environmentally 
induced pressures such as mudslides and erosion, a focus on sustainable coffee production is 
gaining increased attention in many areas of the world. At the same time that coffee 
production is under pressure from climate change impacts, coffee cultivation and processing 
leads to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, contributing to climate change. With more and more 
consumers shifting their buying habits to support products with lower climate and ecosystem 
impacts, coffee supply chain participants increasingly seek ways to reduce their carbon 
footprint and improve the sustainability of their overall growing and processing practices.  
Biochar is a solid material obtained from the thermochemical conversion of biomass in an 
oxygen-limited environment. Biochar can be used as a product itself or as an ingredient within a 
blended product, to improve soil properties and/or resource use efficiency, to remediate 
and/or protect against environmental pollution, and as an avenue for GHG mitigation (IBI, 
2013).  
This paper reviews some ways that biochar is being incorporated into coffee production and 
coffee processing systems to improve overall economic and environmental impacts, with a 
focus on processes typically performed at or near the site of coffee cultivation. It includes 
certain findings related to potential benefits of adding biochar to soils including improved soil 
fertility, disease management and composting; outlines how the use of biochar can reduce 
negative impacts related to waste water from coffee processing; highlights opportunities for 
optimizing the use of coffee residues as potential feedstocks for biochar; and suggests 
pathways the coffee industry can use to decarbonize its supply chain including the use of 
renewable energy.  
The methodology used in this paper combines a review of the peer-reviewed literature with a 
survey of selected coffee and biochar demonstration projects in various coffee growing regions 
around the world. Several project teams were interviewed on different continents and project 
descriptions are included which outline preliminary results and other details from field trials 
using biochar in coffee production. 
Although an increasing number of coffee growers have demonstrated promising results from 
the use of biochar, knowledge about the benefits of carbonizing coffee residues and using 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
4 | P a g e  
 
biochar in coffee cultivation is still low. While more coffee and biochar projects are underway, 
peer-reviewed scientific publications on this topic are few, and many studies focus on coffee 
residue management and not biochar impact on yield. Recommendations for future research 
are highlighted in the Next Steps section. Progress has been made on a few recommendations 
from the previous white paper; 1) a methodology for biochar trials on coffee plantations has 
been drafted and 2) progress has been made on characterizing different types of carbonized 
coffee residues. However, a few recommendations; 1) creating standardized Cost/Benefit 
Analysis (CBA) approaches to better quantify the benefits of biochar use in coffee production 
and processing; and 2) increased coordination between existing coffee and biochar projects to 
share information and identify lessons learned and best practices; have not seen much progress 
due to a lack of funding for these activities.  
New recommendations for future activities include increased education, more comprehensive 
coffee and biochar demonstration projects including on-farm biochar production, agronomic 
evaluation, quantification of economic and social impacts, optimization of biochar and coffee 
residue composting and quantification of carbon drawdown potential for coffee growers and 
processors have been added. If these demonstration projects used a similar method for trial 
design, best practices could be more easily identified and shared.  
The authors thank the following for their support in the creation of this paper: Benjamin Evar, 
Hans Fässler, Peter Kettler, Tom Miles, Martin Schmid, Hans-Peter Schmidt, and the 
Scientific Panel of the B4SS project.  
 
THE COFFEE GROWING CHALLENGE 
Global agricultural operations are increasingly impacted by erratic weather patterns attributed 
to climate change. Coffee, one of the most highly traded agricultural commodities in the world, 
is already being negatively impacted by increasing climate variability with far-reaching effects 
on soil water contents, disease pressure and nutrient losses, potentially leading to increased 
fluctuations in yield and price.  
Coffee production for 2016/2017 is estimated 
at 157.4 million bags (each containing 60 kg of 
coffee beans), up from 145.1 million bags in 
2012/2013 (International Coffee Organization) 
with more than half sourced from the top two 
producing countries: Brazil and Vietnam (Figure 
1). It is grown in over 70 countries and provides 
Figure 1: Coffee Production 2016-2018; Source ICO 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
5 | P a g e  
 
a livelihood for more than 25 million coffee producers, 80 percent of whom are smallholder 
farmers (Fairtrade, 2018).  
Many smallholder coffee growers have limited access to improved farming techniques and 
adaptation technologies, rendering their livelihoods at risk due to predicted worsening of 
negative climate effects which expose both the coffee farmer and the companies they supply to 
high levels of risk. A decrease in yield for these farmers can be catastrophic, potentially causing 
them to abandon farming altogether and forcing coffee laborers to seek work outside the 
coffee sector (Edgerton et al., 2013). In some areas, more extreme weather events cause 
topsoil loss through erosion, while in other areas increasing droughts reduce yield. Imbach et al. 
(2017) predict that the combination of climate change and pollinator decline could reduce land 
suitable for coffee growing by 73 – 88% globally by 2050. Many coffee growing regions have 
seen significant yield losses in recent years due to coffee leaf rust (Hemileia vastatrix), often 
called roya, a parasitic fungus which lowers yield and can eventually kill coffee plants. Central 
America alone suffered damages of close to USD 500 million (approximately 2.7 million bags of 
lost production) from coffee rust in 2012 –2013 (International Coffee Organization Annual 
Report, 2013). Other pests, diseases and fungi are becoming more prevalent in some regions 
particularly areas with fewer cold snaps that formerly helped to reduce incidence of pests. 
Although there are increasing efforts to move towards sustainable production methods, coffee, 
like many crops, can have a substantial carbon footprint due to input requirements of fertilizer, 
energy, and water from cultivation to cup. In some coffee cultivation regions, there is a growing 
use of pesticides to control the coffee berry borer (Hypothenemus hamperi) and coffee leaf 
rust. At the same time many growers have increased the use of fertilizers (United Nations, 
2004) to boost yields in nutrient-poor soils, which can have negative environmental and human 
health impacts if used in excess and contrary to recommendations. In addition, the untreated 
release or burning of coffee residues can cause air and water pollution and is a source of GHG 
emissions (Coltro et al., 2006). Some coffee producing regions use few to no chemical fertilizers 
for crop growth or pesticides but could take advantage of biochar to increase crop yield and soil 
health and reduce GHG emissions. 
More consumers are seeking sustainably produced agricultural products. To meet this demand, 
a wide range of certification programs have arisen that require implementation of best 
management practices in social and environmental realms for coffee cultivation. Certification 
programs may be run by independent third parties (e.g. Bird Friendly, Rainforest Alliance, 
Organic, Max Havelaar, Fair Trade, UTZ Certified, 4C, etc.) or individual coffee companies (e.g. 
Starbucks and Nespresso). Several of these programs require farmers to pay for certification, 
auditing, and investments in new technologies to meet various standards, and these costs may 
not necessarily be entirely offset by increased revenues. However, many of the environmental 
and social benefits from the programs are seen as beneficial by not only consumers but also 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
6 | P a g e  
 
coffee farmers and communities. Increased premiums or buyer retention for certified coffee 
can give growers an incentive for investing in the coffee farming communities (Taylor, 2007). 
Those certification programs that also promote or result in positive impacts on yield may be 
more attractive to growers (Barham et al., 2011). 
 
BENEFITS OF PRODUCTION & USE OF BIOCHAR FOR 
COFFEE PRODUCTION 
Biochar, at its most basic, is carbonized organic material. It can be produced using a wide 
variety of thermochemical conversion technologies, and from a wide variety of feedstocks. 
Although most often biochar is intended for direct use in soils as a soil amendment to improve 
soil functions and water-holding capacity and to reduce land degradation, there are other uses 
for biochar which can benefit the coffee industry across the entire supply chain (Figure 2). For 
example, biochar production can provide a highly sustainable method for managing residues as 
well as generating clean, renewable, decentralized energy. This unique combination of benefits 
makes the use of biochar in coffee production valuable from both a climate change mitigation 
and climate change adaptation perspective. 
 
Figure 2: Biochar integration into a coffee production system, and potential impacts; source: Thayer Tomlinson, 
2015 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
7 | P a g e  
 
Increasingly, coffee and biochar projects are using biochars made from coffee residues though 
some are using other feedstocks. Characterization of coffee residues-derived biochars has 
advanced over the past few years. However soils, weather patterns, and cultivation techniques 
vary widely. To date there is still insufficient biochar trial data to predict impacts on coffee yield 
or tree growth rates. Nonetheless, there is a growing body of experience which supports the 
use of biochar in coffee cultivation and coffee processing operations, to improve the 
sustainability of the entire supply chain. This paper highlights some of the many benefits of 
carbonizing coffee residues and using the resulting biochar within the coffee growing and 
processing industry. Information from studies using biochar made from biomass other than 
coffee residues and applied to other crops is also examined to illustrate general findings and 
highlight potential benefits, based on sound research, but that may not have been studied yet 
in coffee cultivation. 
SOIL AMENDMENT 
When added to the soil, biochar is generally considered a soil amendment and a carrier for 
nutrients, but not a fertilizer. However, biochars with relatively high nutrient content that were 
produced from nutrient-rich feedstocks, such as manure, may be considered fertilizers. Most 
biochars do not contain significant amounts of nutrients needed by plants but develop a high 
nutrient holding capacity. In addition, various other properties of biochar can help improve 
different soil functions, soil fertility and soil health. One such characteristic of most biochars 
made from woody or leafy material is their high porosity which can improve water 
management properties of soils. Coffee plants do not tolerate saturation in the rooting zone. 
With the potential for increased heavy rains in some coffee growing regions, soils could become 
waterlogged, potentially causing a decline in yield and plant health. Another effect of climate 
change is the increased variability of precipitation. For farmers in some areas, this may require 
the installation of irrigation systems to maintain plant health during dry periods. Biochar from 
vine prunings has been shown to improve water holding capacity in perennial cropping systems 
(Baronti et al., 2014). In addition, biochar made from white lead trees (Leucaena leucocephala) 
has been shown to improve certain physicochemical properties of highly weathered soils which 
may help to reduce erosion (Jien et al., 2013). It can also facilitate rebuilding soil when heavy 
rains wash away fertile topsoil. 
Although coffee plants tend to prefer slightly acidic soils, some coffee growing regions have 
soils that are too acidic or have generally poor nutrient levels. Many biochars have a high pH 
and can have a liming effect in soils which can reduce the need for off-farm inputs of lime. In 
addition, biochar generally develops a high cation exchange capacity (CEC) which can improve 
the soil’s ability to retain many nutrients (Reddy et al., 2013). This not only reduces the amount 
of fertilizers required but can also reduce leaching of excess nutrients into local waterways. 
Biochars may also reduce leaching of nonpolar pesticides and herbicides (Kookana, 2010; 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
8 | P a g e  
 
Delwiche et al., 2014) especially if they strongly adsorb to biochars with high surface areas 
(Cabrera et al., 2014). However, this same effect may also reduce pesticide or herbicide efficacy 
(Tang et al., 2013). 
The high nutrient holding capacity of biochar makes it suitable to be charged with organic 
waste nutrients such as compost, manure, or animal/human urine which may be a freely 
available fertilizer to small coffee farmers. When thoroughly mixed, the organic nutrient 
solutions enter the biochar’s porous system and are prevented from leaching out when applied 
to soil. These organic, fortified biochars become slow release fertilizers and can provide 
continuous plant essential nutrients, particularly nitrogen, without the risk of ground water 
contamination (Kammann et al., 2015).    
DISEASE MANAGEMENT 
Warming temperatures are aiding the spread of pests and pathogens across the globe. Coffee 
leaf rust, also known as roya, a fungus that has caused great damage to arabica coffee trees, is 
an increasing threat to coffee growers particularly in Central and South America. Preventing 
and controlling rust takes many forms including selecting resistant varieties, proper cultural 
management (e.g. provision of sufficient nutrients, pruning, etc.) and chemical treatment. 
Biochar may be beneficial in controlling rust and can also help mitigate some of the negative 
impacts caused by using chemical controls.  
Pruning is strongly encouraged as a means of controlling fungal spread. However, pruning alone 
is not sufficient as spores can still spread from pruned leaves, especially during the wet season. 
Carbonizing infected leaves and branches is an effective agricultural practice to eradicate 
spores and minimize transmission.   
Proper nutrient supply and pH management can help coffee trees fend off leaf rust and other 
diseases. Blending organic or chemical fertilizers with biochar can reduce nutrient leaching and 
render nutrients more available to plants over a longer period as compared to when fertilizer is 
applied without the benefit of a highly porous carbon structure. Often nutrients in fertilizers are 
leached or eroded due to heavy rains, leading to wasted money and polluted streams, wetlands 
and aquifers. Due to its capacity to retain nutrients, biochar offers a way to reduce fertilizer 
costs and negative impacts caused by leaching and runoff. It can also help reduce soil acidity 
leading to better nutrient availability. Unfavorable soil pH can encourage propagation of fungi 
such as leaf rust, so maintaining optimal pH (6.0 – 7.5) is a critical disease management 
strategy. 
While many coffee farms were organic by tradition or economic necessity, the devastating 
onslaught of coffee rust has caused some farmers to lose the sick plants in that season or turn 
to fungicides as one of a variety of different disease management strategies. Organic options 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
9 | P a g e  
 
include copper-based fungicides which cover plant tissue and block respiration and protein 
production within spores. Although copper-based fungicides are sprayed on plants, they do not 
enter plant tissues. It should be noted that copper-based fungicides are some of the most toxic 
and persistent (Bünemann, 2009) and can lead to long-term negative impacts on soil fertility 
and biota. Some research is beginning to show the biochar can be used to immobilize Cu in 
agricultural soils (Cardenas-Aguiar, 2017). 
A group of chemical fungicides called triazoles act as both a preventive and curative fungicide at 
least in the early stages of a coffee rust outbreak. For larger infections, fungicides within the 
strobilurins family are recommended. However, these toxins may be responsible for increased 
resistance to fungal remedies for humans (Bastos, 2018), and so these chemicals should be 
used with caution and their spread contained whenever possible. Biochar can help with 
containment in a few different ways. Biochar made from rice straw can be used to filter water 
contaminated with pesticides (Taha, 2014) and some woody biochars have been shown to 
immobilize pesticides in soils (Yu, 2010). Cheng et al. (2017) showed that biochar made from 
tobacco stalks can increase the population of bacteria capable of degrading pesticide pollutants 
while also decreasing plant uptake of the toxins. There is even evidence to suggest that 
compost containing biochar may contain antifungal properties (Sehar, 2017), though this has 
yet to be tested against fungi that impact coffee.  
Researchers from the Indonesian Coffee and Cocoa Research Institute were looking for more 
sustainable alternatives for nematode control in coffee plantations. Chemical control of the 
roundworms is expensive and can kill off beneficial microflora and impact groundwater 
supplies. In an in vitro study, Rahayu et al. (2017) found that an application of 4% woody 
biochar per Ml of water was able to significantly reduce populations of the parasitic nematode 
Pratylenchus coffeae in petri dishes. These root-lesion nematodes lead to reduced uptake of 
water and nutrients and can lead to stunting and leaf shedding.  
The same researchers found that an application rate of 2% woody biochar per Ml of water 
benefitted young Arabica coffee seedlings more than 3%, 1% or 0.5% biochar application rates 
in terms of higher fresh weight of roots (14%), shoots (18%) and dry weight of shoots (21%).  
 
COMPOSTING 
Many coffee producers compost pulp and other by-products of coffee production as a means of 
residue management. Compost can be a valuable soil amendment for application to crops. For 
those producers that do compost such as the Kaweri Coffee Plantation in Uganda (Figure 3), 
adding from 10 – 30% biochar (w/w) can provide a number of advantages (Sanchez et al., 
2017).  

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
10 | P a g e  
 
Biochar added to compost for a few weeks 
becomes pre-charged with nutrients adsorbed 
from the compost and can be added to soils as a 
nutrient carrier. Using biochar in compost also 
enhances the surface of biochar leading to 
improved CEC which increases nutrient holding. It 
can also increase micropores in biochar which 
increases adsorption capabilities (Sanchez et al., 
2017). 
Biochar has been found to accelerate and improve 
the composting process—mainly increased 
temperature which stimulates microbial activity. 
This increased activity and temperatures can also reduce certain pathogens though it is 
unknown what happens to caffeine and tannins in pulp when temperatures are increased. 
Biochar addition during composting has been shown in both research and commercial 
operations to reduce labor for turning piles and improve habitat for microorganisms, enhance 
moisture, aeration and nutrient availability thereby boosting microbial growth (Sanchez et al., 
2017). This may have important economic implications since accelerated composting is a 
desirable effect, especially with organic materials that require long composting times and take 
up space at coffee operations. 
Biochar addition to compost has been found to reduce emission rates of methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (N2O) which result from the composting process (Wang et al., 2013), and reduce 
nitrogen losses including ammonia which can cause nuisance odors (Bernal et al., 2009). 
FILTRATION 
The amount of water needed for coffee cultivation is relatively high, but the amount of water 
needed for depulping, fermenting, and washing beans can be even more significant depending 
on the process and relative age of the processing equipment. Some estimates put the amount 
of water between 1 m3 – 20 m3 per ton of fresh coffee cherry processed (Blinova et al., 2017). 
Untreated coffee processing wastewater is typically very acidic, as low as pH 4, with high levels 
of organic matter (i.e. pulp and mucilage) and, when released into waterways, can negatively 
impact aquatic ecosystems. Some of the organic matter also contains tannins, caffeine and 
other potentially toxic elements. 
Biochar shares many characteristics with activated charcoal which is often used in water 
filtration. Using biochar to treat effluent from coffee processing can not only help reduce 
organics in wastewater, but some studies have shown that certain enhanced biochars can 
remove significant amounts of nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients (Li et al., 2017).  
Figure 3: Biochar enriched compost production at Kaweri 
Coffee Plantation in Uganda.  

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
11 | P a g e  
 
Activated charcoal filters have been used since 1933 as one of four main processes to 
decaffeinate coffee. The process is known as the Swiss Water Process. Once saturated, it is 
feasible to regenerate the carbon by heating it to at least 650oC. However, this method 
eliminates the possibility of harvesting the caffeine which has value as a food and beverage 
ingredient. It remains to be seen if biochar made from coffee residues could fulfill this same 
function with similar efficacy. However, researchers have shown that carbonized pineapple 
leaves can be effectively used to filter out caffeine, an emerging contaminant of concern, from 
aqueous solutions (Baltrame et al., 2018). 
It is also unknown if the caffeine-saturated biochar could be utilized in the ever-increasing 
number of trendy foods and drinks that are tinted with activated charcoal, potentially providing 
an energy boost in addition to the purported cleansing properties.  
ENERGY PRODUCTION 
Thermo-chemical conversion technologies capable of creating biochar include pyrolysis and 
gasification. Pyrolysis thermally decomposes biomass without the presence of oxygen to create 
biochar at temperatures starting at 300⁰C. Gasification uses limited oxygen and higher 
temperatures (500⁰C – 1,500⁰C) (Lehmann et al., 2015). A co-product of biochar production is 
energy in the form of process heat, liquid fuel, or combustible gases that can be used to supply 
heat or electricity.  
Coffee milling stations require large amounts of energy; procuring sufficient, affordable energy 
can be challenging in certain remote areas. Using coffee residues to generate heat for drying or 
power (2.7 MWh per ton dry waste are available, 1.8 MWh will stay in the biochar) for other 
processing tasks replacing wood or fossil fuels while simultaneously reducing residues in an 
environmentally beneficial manner. Replacing fossil fuel generated electricity within the coffee 
industry with renewable electricity produced in the pyrolysis biochar system could also help 
reduce the carbon intensity of coffee production – or perhaps even make it carbon negative. 
Using data from a pyrolysis pilot project in Vietnam (see project summary p29) 2.5 t wet pulp or 
0.7 t of dry pulp are produced for every ton of raw dry coffee bean. This biomass contains 
about 3.2 MWh of energy – of which 40% will remain in the biochar and 60% becomes available 
to generate heat or combined heat and power. Using a typical system efficiency of 85%, 1.6 
MWh of energy is available per t raw coffee bean – which should be sufficient for coffee drying. 
When using the heat generated during pyrolysis to generate power, net electrical efficiency is 
low, approximately 15%. Given that, utilization of heat will remain an important part of the 
business case and energy balance. 
 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
12 | P a g e  
 
BIOCHAR FROM COFFEE RESIDUES 
The amount of coffee residues from cultivation to cup exceeds the total weight of the coffee 
cherry harvest when tree prunings and leaf litter are taken into consideration. Much of the 
waste biomass is difficult to utilize for a variety of reasons and often ends up having a 
detrimental impact on the environment. Addressed below are the various types of coffee 
residues that could be converted into biochar and the benefits and challenges related to each 
(Figure 4).  
  
 
Figure 4: Coffee processes, products and residues. 
 
Prunings and leaf litter  
Coffee plants are pruned to maintain ideal quality of yield and tree height for harvesting. The 
amount of pruning material varies greatly depending on: number of plants per hectare, coffee 
variety, whether plants are grown in sun or shade or on steep terrain, monoculture or 
polyculture, desired tree shape, etc. Pruning involves removal of suckers as well as 
unproductive or excess branches. In sun-grown monoculture plantations, prunings may average 
1 ton ha-1 year-1 whereas in shade grown or polyculture plantations the amount can be 4 – 5 
times larger when the biomass from surrounding shade trees is included.   
The amount of coffee leaves (leaf litter) per hectare can be substantial, especially in shade 
grown systems. Often the litter remains on the ground and is used for mulch, composting, or to 
suppress weed growth. Removal of coffee leaf litter, at least on an occasional basis, may prove 
beneficial as caffeine from coffee leaves can leach into soils and reduce productivity (Weinberg 
et al., 2002). In addition, removal of disease impacted leaves may reduce the spread of fungal 
diseases.   

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
13 | P a g e  
 
During one study in Kenya, Alvum-Toll et al. (2011) analyzed the nutrient content of biochar 
made from coffee leaves as compared with biochar made from other feedstocks such as maize 
stover, coconut leaves, cassava stems, and banana leaves (Table 1). Coffee litter-derived 
biochar had significantly higher nitrogen than all other biochars and only biochar from fresh 
banana leaves had higher levels of potassium. 
 
Table 1: Carbon and nutrient concentrations in biochars from various feedstocks;  
Source: Alvum-Toll et al., 2011 
 
 
In addition to normal maintenance pruning, most coffee trees undergo extensive rejuvenation 
pruning every 6 – 10 years to reverse yield declines. This, in addition to the removal of diseased 
or damaged trees, produces a considerable amount of biomass per hectare, all of which could 
be utilized as feedstock for biochar production.    
Coffee Pulp, Husks, Hulls  
Only a small fraction of the harvested fruit (cherries) ends up being 
consumed, leaving a large amount of residues to manage. Coffee 
cherries are comprised of several parts in addition to the coffee 
beans (Figure 5), but often little of the non-bean portion of the 
cherry is utilized due to the high concentration of caffeine and 
tannins which renders this material difficult to use for livestock feed 
or soil amendments.  
The first step in coffee processing involves removing the skin, stems 
and pulp. Coffee can be processed in either a wet or dry system. In 
wet processing, the portion that is leftover is referred to as pulp. Left on its own, wet pulp is 
Plant material
C
N
P
K
Ca
Mg
Mn
B
Zn
Fe
Cu
Na
Fresh banana leaves
51.2
1.05
0.16
8.68
1.83
0.76
1637.0
20.80
126.20
2762.0
15.01
706.8
Maize stovers
52.2
0.58
0.10
1.03
0.64
0.50
363.7
4.63
137.40
5368.0
11.31
573.2
Wilted banana leaves
54.0
1.37
0.12
0.55
4.13
0.72
7348.0
32.93
325.50
2298.0
10.75
570.6
Coffee leaves
54.1
2.63
0.27
4.80
3.33
1.01
1305.0
141.00
211.70
6019.0
123.80
1026.0
Coconut leaves
61.0
0.47
0.10
3.00
1.29
0.55
390.0
28.03
62.25
349.5
6.45
9497.0
Cassava
60.8
1.73
0.31
4.01
3.22
0.99
387.9
20.35
75.46
209.5
11.75
777.9
Macronutrients  (as % of total)
Micronutrients  (ppm)
Figure 5: Coffee bean schematic 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
14 | P a g e  
 
very acidic and can cause several environmental problems 
including water contamination if disposed of near 
waterways. This can result in methane and nitrous oxide 
emissions from anaerobic decomposition of the organic 
material. In some areas, coffee pulp is composted. While 
composting also provides benefits there can be significant 
GHG emissions depending on the method used. Pulp may 
also provide a breeding ground for pests and pathogens as 
well as cause significant odor issues from the decomposing 
feedstock.  
The typical high moisture content (>80%) of pulp (Figure 6) 
can present a challenge to converting this material into 
biochar, but biochar production technology exists that can handle high moisture content 
feedstocks or the heat produced during carbonization can be utilized to lower the moisture 
content. In addition to reducing the sheer volume of leftover residues, carbonizing pulp could 
reduce pests, pathogens, odors, and GHG emissions.  
Estimates from Brazil for coffee pulp production are roughly the equivalent to the amount of 
coffee beans produced (49 million bags in 2016, i.e. 2.9M metric tons). Much of the pulp is land 
applied to add carbon and nutrients to soils. However, this practice can lead to population 
increases of insects which can harm humans and livestock. Carbonizing pulp (Figure 7) would 
eliminate that problem while slowing the return of carbon to the atmosphere. Biochar made 
from coffee pulp is relatively high in K which could 
lower or replace imported sources of potassium. 
It also has high CEC as compared to other types of 
biochar which can increase nutrient holding 
capacity of soils, leading to reduced fertilizer 
requirement (Domingues et al., 2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Coffee pulp; from 
http://theplantationdiaries.typepad.com
/the_plantation_diaries/el-salvador 
Figure 7: Coffee pulp pyrolyzed at 500C using Pyreg reactor 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
15 | P a g e  
 
When a dry process for removing coffee cherry 
skins is used, cherries are sun-dried and then 
dehulled. The waste biomass is referred to as coffee 
hulls or husks and is often piled in mounds. It is 
estimated that for every ton of green coffee 
produced 180 kg of husk are produced (Blinova et 
al., 2017). In some areas the husk mounds are 
burned to reduce their mass; however, the mounds 
often smolder rather than burn causing significant 
air pollution (Figure 8). It has been observed in 
some cases that the mounds self-ignite after rain 
events, creating a hazard to personal health and 
property.  
The typical moisture content of coffee husks is low (~14%), making conversion into biochar 
much easier than with pulp. Yield from coffee husks varies from 43.5% - 31.6% when pyrolyzed 
at temperatures from 350°C to 550°C (Table 2). Fairly simple technologies exist to convert husks 
into biochar (see further information under Laos project). Larger scale continuous feed 
machines can also carbonize husks and generate a significant amount of energy that is used for 
drying beans or converted into electricity (see further information under Vietnam project). 
Table 2: Biochar from coffee husks. Source: Domingues et al., 2017 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Temperature  
Yield 
Fixed 
Carbon 
Ash 
Volatile 
Matter 
[°C] 
[% of 
feedstock] 
[%] 
[%] 
[%] 
350 
43.5 
52.5 
12.9 
34.6 
+450 
37.7 
60.9 
12.9 
26.2 
550 
31.6 
62.8 
19.6 
17.6 
. 
 
 
 
 
Mucilage 
Coffee mucilage is a sticky gelatinous material found underneath the pulp layer which 
constitutes up to 4% of the dry weight of the coffee cherry. Made up of sugars and pectin, the 
mucilage is often removed via fermentation. The resulting wastewater is very acidic and can be 
detrimental to waterways if released untreated. Given the high moisture content and low 
carbon content, mucilage is unlikely to be a viable biochar feedstock. However biochar could be 
added to compost made with mucilage to improve the composting process. 
Figure 8: Coffee husk being burnt as disposal at Yayo, Illubabor, 
Ethiopia; Abera Melesse Ayalneh; 
http://www.northsouth.ethz.ch/programmes/sawiris/sawiris_4  

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
16 | P a g e  
 
Parchment 
Once the mucilage is removed and the beans are dried, the parchment layer is removed leaving 
what is known as “green coffee”. Parchment is a hard shell-like layer that represents ~12% of 
the dry weight of the cherry. Due to low moisture content and relatively high lignin content, 
parchment is an ideal feedstock for biochar. It should be noted that Schweikle et al. (2018) 
found biochar made from ‘coffee shells’ (i.e., parchment) to be low in P and K content and less 
porous than biochar made from other feedstock (e.g. corn cobs, bamboo) with lower microbial 
activity when used as a soil amendment. As with most feedstocks the yields from carbonization 
decrease as temperature increases in this case decreasing from 33% to 24% as temperatures 
moved from 300oC to 600oC.  
  
Chaff  
Once green coffee beans have been shipped to consuming countries, residue management 
becomes the problem of the roaster or brewer. Coffee chaff (also called silverskin) is a 
lightweight material that comes off the coffee bean during the roasting process. For every 120 
tons of roasted coffee, 1 ton of chaff is produced (Galanikas, 2017). Due to its insubstantial 
nature, chaff can be difficult to capture and burn directly although some efforts have been 
made to mix chaff with sawdust to create pressed fuel briquettes. Chaff has relatively high 
levels of minerals (potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, phosphorus, amongst others) and 
can therefore be desirable as part of a compost or mulch blend. However, due to its matting 
tendency, hydrophobicity and a fairly low pH, it can present certain challenges when used in 
excess. Given the right type of handling and processing equipment, chaff may make a high-
quality biochar particularly for applications needing high thermal conductivity and diffusivity 
(Quosai et al., 2018).  
Spent Coffee Grounds (SCG) 
After coffee beans have been used to brew coffee beverages they take the form of spent coffee 
grounds (SCG). While there have been efforts to find valuable markets for SCG, the distributed 
nature of the end product makes it challenging to reach economies of scale to make this cost 
effective. Large retail outlets such as coffee shops often give away SCG to customers or at best 
send it to local composters. Efforts at converting SCG into biofuels and biochar have shown 
promise; for example, Vardon et al., (2013) compared the effect of using SCG biochar in soils 
against SCG on their own and a control (each of the three with and without fertilizer) and found 
that the SCG biochar showed the greatest enhancement in crop biomass yield. In another 
study, biochar made from SCG was successfully used to purify water and helped sorb chemicals 
such as mercury (Manariotis et al., 2014). Newer research has shown that SCG-derived biochars 
made using hydro thermal carbonization and doped with nitrogen can be utilized for CO2 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
17 | P a g e  
 
capture (Liu et al., 2018). These engineered biochars proved to be regenerable, losing only 6% 
stability after 10 adsorption/desorption cycles. 
 
 
BIOCHAR PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGIES AND CO-PRODUCTS 
Small scale cookstoves 
Biochar-producing cookstoves have been used around the world for at least ten years. In 
cultures where the traditional three-stone fire cooking method is used, biochar-producing 
stoves can have the added benefit of significantly improved indoor air quality. Dry material such 
as coffee husks and coffee tree prunings make ideal feedstock for these stoves. In areas with 
limited forest cover, these stoves can reduce firewood collection, or purchasing needs if other 
feedstocks are used. The Kaffa Kocher project team in Ethiopia created a slightly larger stove 
that runs on dried coffee husks supplied by a local dehulling station and is specifically designed 
for local small business women that earn their living by cooking (http://www.kaffakocher.ch/). 
Farm Scale Kilns 
Biochar production technologies such as the Top Lit Updraft (TLUD) kiln, the more recently 
developed Kon-Tiki kiln (Figure 9) (Schmidt and Taylor, 2014) or simple retorts provide low-cost 
batch processing options to create larger amounts of biochar than those produced in stoves. 
TLUDs are closed kilns often built using 200 liter 
metal barrels. TLUDs can produce approximately 
25% yield per batch. While these units can be built 
inexpensively (<USD 100), certain low-cost models 
have short service life as the metal tends to 
buckle from the contained heat. The Kon-Tiki kiln 
is one of a growing number of different “flame-
cap” kilns which produce biochar in an unenclosed 
cone receptacle. These kilns can generate more 
than 200 liters of biochar in 1 – 3 hours depending 
on the type, size and moisture content of 
feedstock, size of the kiln and technical operating skills. Flame cap kilns can process feedstock 
with higher moisture content and less pre-processing (e.g. size reduction) than TLUDs. 
Production costs in the developing world for the Kon-Tiki kiln can vary greatly; the most basic 
Kon-Tiki kilns are soil cone pit kilns. Metal flame cap kilns have been made in more than 70 
countries with more sophisticated models starting at about USD 500. Both TLUDs and flame cap 
kilns require basic training to ensure good quality and safe biochar production and to ensure 
that particulate matter and GHG emissions are minimized. Cornelissen et al. (2016) compared 
Figure 9: The Kon-Tiki kiln in Nepal; courtesy of Moira 
Schmidt 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
18 | P a g e  
 
emissions from various types of flame cap kilns and more traditional kilns, finding that they 
reduced CO, products of incomplete combustion and NOx. 
 
A retort for biochar production is generally a closed 
metal container into which feedstock is put and 
then heated using other biomass. There are a 
variety of sizes which range from tin cans to large 
metal barrels (Figure 10). One advantage a retort 
may have over other low cost kilns is that it can 
carbonize a wide variety of feedstocks which may be 
more difficult to carbonize due to low air flow 
between biomass particles or high moisture 
content, such as coffee pulp or chaff. 
 
 
 
Medium-Scale Pyrolysis 
Medium-scale pyrolysis or gasification technologies customized to produce biochar are often 
referred to as Combined Heat and Biochar (CHAB) and are available in a range of sizes. Given 
the economic realities in most countries where coffee is cultivated, the high cost of large scale 
CHAB equipment currently available in the developed world does not make these systems 
economically viable even when the thermal energy co-product is factored into the equation. 
Medium scale equipment (<USD 50,000) applicable for milling stations is being tested or 
awaiting funding for use at a few coffee and biochar 
projects (Figure 11). In addition to mitigating the 
various waste disposal issues previously described, 
many of these reactors can provide energy which can 
be used for heating needs. Larger scale pyrolysis 
equipment (>USD 500,000) may be more appropriate 
for large coffee roasting operations in the developed 
world. These can reduce residue management costs 
while producing valuable by-products in the form of 
heat and electricity which can be used within the 
roasting operation.  
DECARBONIZATION PATHWAYS USING BIOCHAR 
There are wide variations in coffee production techniques (polyculture vs. monoculture, shaded 
vs. unshaded, wet vs. dry processing, etc.) which lead to variation between studies of the 
Figure 10: Rotating retort for carbonizing coffee husks. 
Kaweri Coffee Plantation in Uganda. 
Figure 11: Pyrolysis machine designed by Okozentrum, 
carbonizing coffee husks and generating energy in Vietnam. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
19 | P a g e  
 
carbon footprint of coffee. The operational carbon footprint will also vary as a result of the 
measurement approach, the parameters of the footprint and the specific production 
environment. Costa Rican shade grown polyculture coffee was found to emit 1.93 kg of CO2e 
per kg of green coffee produced (Navichoc et al., 2013). Of these emissions, 53% came from 
cultivation, 33% from milling operations, and 14% were related to transport activities. The vast 
majority of the farm emissions, 95%, resulted from the use of chemical fertilizer. A broader 
carbon footprint study surveyed 116 coffee farms from five countries in Latin America 
encompassing all major types of coffee plantations (i.e. traditional polyculture, commercial 
polyculture, shaded monoculture, and unshaded monoculture) and found that emissions 
ranged from 6.2 – 7.3 kg CO2e per kg of parchment coffee (i.e. parchment still intact) for 
polyculture and 9.0 – 10.8 CO2e for monoculture production (van Rikxoort et al., 2014). This 
study showed the main sources of emissions included: soil emissions and production and 
application of fertilizers; decomposition of pruning and crop residues; fermentation and 
wastewater treatment. 
Biochar can help to reduce coffee’s carbon footprint in various aspects of cultivation and 
processing operations. Decarbonization using biochar can be achieved by both reducing current 
emissions as well as through long-term carbon sequestration. Through pyrolysis, the carbon 
existing in the biomass converts to a more stable form in biochar—this carbon would otherwise 
rapidly mineralize to CO2 if either burned directly or left to decompose. Biochar production can 
sequester up to 50% of the initial carbon in biomass. This compares favorably to the low 
amounts retained after burning the biomass (3%) or after biological decomposition (<10 – 20% 
after 5 – 10 years) (Lehmann et al., 2006). The Mean Residence Time (MRT) of different 
biochars—i.e. the average amount of time that the carbon stays in the soil—has been found to 
fall mostly in the centennial to millennial time scales but varies considerably depending on the 
type of feedstock and production parameters (Lehmann et al., 2015). 
Table 3 summarizes the various ways using biochar in coffee cultivation and processing can help 
to decarbonize as well as adapt to the anticipated impacts of climate change. Sequestration 
potential of carbonized coffee residues is not limited to below ground. Dahal et al. (2018) found 
that adding biochar made from coffee pulp, husks and discarded beans and added to existing 
coffee trees at a rate of 500 g per tree (equivalent to 5t/ha) not only increased soil carbon 
levels more than unamended soils after two years but also increased aboveground carbon 
stocks. On average, the carbon in coffee trees increased 46.8% in trees planted in biochar 
amended soils compared to 19.6% for unamended soils. 
Adding biochar to soils used for coffee cultivation may also help to adapt to some of the 
impacts of climate change such as prolonged drought or increased disease pressures. Biochar 
may increase buffering of soil water management during periods of drought and, as discussed 
previously, it can improve the health of plants enabling enhanced disease resistance. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
20 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Table 3: Decarbonization pathways within coffee cultivation and processing 
 
 
 
 
  Mitigation potential 
Stage in      
Supply Chain 
Practice  
Adaptation 
potential 
Carbon 
footprint 
reduction   
Carbon 
sequestration   
Cultivation 
  
  
  
  
  
Convert leaf litter, prunings into biochar 
  
x 
  
  
Add biochar as soil amendment 
x 
x 
x 
  
Add biochar to pulp compost  
x 
x 
x 
  
Reduce fertilizer inputs 
x 
x 
  
  
Renewable energy (cook stoves) 
  
x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Post-harvest  
Convert pulp to biochar 
  
x 
  
processing 
Renewable energy (CHAB) 
  
x 
  
  
Convert parchment to biochar 
  
x 
  
  
Create drying slabs from “charcrete” 
  
x 
x 
  
Waste water filtration of mucilage with biochar 
  
x 
  
 
ECONOMICS OF BIOCHAR USE IN COFFEE PRODUCTION AND 
PROCESSING 
The question of purchasing or producing biochar is one that must be answered on a case by 
case basis. Purchasing biochar may not be an option due to lack of local availability or cost.  
However, there is usually enough under-utilized biomass available on coffee plantations or 
processing mills which could be converted into biochar. Given the availability of low and 
sometimes no-cost biochar production equipment and relatively low labor costs, economics is 
not the main barrier for biochar production and use. It is more likely that education - on how to 
produce and why farmers should use biochar - is the largest barrier. However, for farmers or 
mill operators to be convinced to change their current operating procedures, they often need 
to understand the economic advantages. 
The benefits of biochar from the research and demonstration projects on coffee plantations 
described in the following section focus on yield improvements, increased survival of coffee 
trees and reduced input costs. Yield improvements were attributed to improved water and 
fertilizer use efficiency as well as improved plant resistance to pests and pathogens. Cost 
reductions were largely focused on the need for less fertilizer but, in at least one case, could 
also be attributed to lower labor costs related to reduced need to replant coffee trees that die 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
21 | P a g e  
 
prematurely or are under-producing. The impact of less disease pressure from reduced land 
application of pulp has not yet been quantified. 
At the milling station level, while there are multiple environmental benefits, translating these 
into reduced fines resulting from a failure to comply with regulations, or reduced disposal costs, 
may have more relevance in the developed world, where regulations tend to be stricter and 
more strongly enforced than in many developing countries. Using biochar to filter wastewater 
may be of keen interest as this may reduce the amount of water needed. The saturated char 
may become a new revenue stream for the mill. Use of renewable heat made from carbonizing 
residues to dry cherries can reduce reliance on fossil fuels and decrease costs.     
NEW REVENUE STREAMS 
Although biochar produced on farms is ideally suited for use as a soil amendment, biochar 
produced at centralized mills could provide the raw material for a growing number of different 
products including livestock bedding, building materials, packaging materials, cosmetics, etc. 
Packaging material made using the biochar from coffee chaff, called ‘chardboard’, has been 
prototyped. This material has shown many beneficial attributes and cascading uses (Draper, 
2014). Bricks and plaster have been made using charcoal in Europe and were found to be very 
effective at controlling humidity in warehouses and wine cellars. Additional testing showed that 
this material has added benefits related to insulation when applied throughout the building 
envelope. Plasters with charcoal incorporated into them could potentially be used in a number 
of different ways within the coffee supply chain. Pavements for drying coffee using this material 
instead of concrete would likely be cheaper as the materials could be made on site. It is also 
likely that the darker color would speed up the drying process. 
COFFEE AND BIOCHAR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS 
In the first edition of this white paper, the authors identified more than a dozen projects which 
involved biochar as a component of coffee cultivation or processing activities. This edition 
highlights new projects started in Brazil, Colombia, Peru, China, Tanzania, Uganda, Ethiopia and 
Vietnam. Project coordinators for these projects identified various drivers for the coffee and 
biochar trials including: 
 
● improved soil fertility through increased pH and water/nutrient management; 
● improved soil resiliency to adapt to drought, heavy rain and pest;  
● reduced dependence on fertilizers and other inputs; 
● improved transplant survival rates for young coffee plants; 
● ability to convert coffee residues into renewable energy and/or effective soil 
amendment; and 
● improved composting functions when applied to coffee pulp compost. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
22 | P a g e  
 
Note that these projects encompass a range of implementation stages, testing protocols, and 
experiences; some have more details on crop effects, while others are focusing more on residue 
management and valorization. Along with these profiles, project managers identified additional 
projects planned in Burundi, Mexico, and elsewhere. 
 
BRAZIL: FAZENDA DA LAGOA, NKG TROPICAL MANAGEMENT 
Main Focus: Residue management & improved soil fertility 
 
Fazenda da Lagoa grows Arabica coffee in high density rows. Soils in the area are highly 
weathered, acidic, with relatively low carbon content. Traditionally, lime has been used to 
moderate soil acidity.   
 
Recently 52 ha of commercial new coffee trees were planted using a variety of different biochar 
treatments. Given the planting system used on the plantation, the biochar application process 
was modified from the one used in previous biochar trials managed by NKG Tropical 
Management. A ‘V’ shape trough of 80 cm depth is created, biochar compost was deposited 
(Figure 12), after which the furrow was closed, and the tree was planted. Twenty-five tons of 
compost was used per hectare with different amounts of biochar, from 2 to 6 tons per ha. In a 
small, comparative trial, 6 application rates between 1.9 – 22.8 tons biochar/ha were tested, 
which is currently under an ongoing evaluation process.  
 
Given the promising results from earlier trials using biochar 
enriched compost for new trees, an additional trial using biochar 
compost to grow seedlings in nurseries was started in January 
2018. Traditionally, seedlings have been grown in a mix of 70% 
soil and 30% decomposed chicken or cattle manure. This trial is 
experimenting with 10%, 20% and 30% biochar additions (v/v). 
Although only 6 months into the trial, the roots of the seedlings 
with the addition of biochar showed better growth than control. 
The seedlings are expected to be planted on the farm in late 
November 2018 at which point final evaluation will be done. 
 
Hans Fässler, CEO of NKG Tropical Management, noted that 
there is keen interest though not sufficient knowledge about biochar production and use 
amongst coffee growers in Brazil. Ongoing work with coffee byproducts should demonstrate 
the merits of changing typical disposal strategies into a value-added process with resulting 
economic benefits. He believes that simple and cheap biochar production systems are key to 
Figure 12: Biochar compost deposited 
in V shaped furrows prior to planting 
new coffee trees. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
23 | P a g e  
 
enabling biochar to scale in coffee growing regions. Their next step in optimizing the use of 
biochar will be to look at filtering coffee wash water effluent with biochar as a means of 
harvesting the nutrients in the effluent. Results from experimental work will gradually define 
the optimal biochar and compost mixture for the farm’s coffee-growing soils. 
 
PERU: THE BIOCHAR FOR SUSTAINABLE SOILS (B4SS) PROJECT 
Main Focus: improve coffee yield and quality, and share the knowledge generated on the use 
of biochar for sustainable land management 
 
The Biochar for Sustainable Soils (B4SS) Project was funded by the Global Environment Facility 
and United Nations Environment from April 
2015 to September 2018. The B4SS was 
implemented in China, Ethiopia, Kenya, Peru, 
Indonesia and Vietnam. In Peru, the B4SS was 
coordinated by Dr Brenton Ladd who has 
experience in undertaking biochar research 
work in Peru since 2011. The production of 
coffee is an important economic activity for 
some of the most economically disadvantaged 
people in Peru and the industry is facing 
challenges due to the roya rust fungus 
epidemic.  
 
Biochars were produced from green waste diverted from landfill in Lima. Various biochar 
formulations were designed to address the soil constraints identified by coffee growers in San 
Ramon, a small town in the central jungle of Peru, where the B4SS project took place. One of 
the leading farmers is growing coffee with one of the biochar formulations that the B4SS 
developed and found that the leaves of some coffee plants have been affected by the roya 
fungus, whereas there are no spots on the leaves of the plants that were planted in soils 
amended with biochar (Figure 13). 
   
 
Although that experiment was not monitored by the B4SS project, Dr. Ladd suggests that 
biochar may have improved the mineral nutrition of the coffee plants and therefore enabled 
them to better construct the nitrogen-based defense compounds that may have allowed them 
to defend themselves against the insect vectors that spread the rust fungus. Participating 
farmers plan to continue the use of biochar in coffee cultivation. More research is required to 
Figure 13: Coffee leaf from a plant grown with biochar (left) 
and coffee leaf from a plant grown without biochar (right) in 
San Ramon, Peru 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
24 | P a g e  
 
explain the positive effects of biochar on coffee rust fungus observed in the B4SS project in 
Peru (www.biochar.international). 
 
CHINA: YUNNAN COFFEE TRADERS 
Main Focus:  coffee residue biochar for filtration 
 
Yunnan Coffee Traders (YCT) in southwest China is focused on sustainable technologies for rural 
coffee growers and processors. Working with researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder, 
they have been carbonizing various coffee wastes (e.g. husks, parchment) to manage organic 
material as well as produce valuable products such as filtration media and fertilizers. YCT have 
also been testing low cost methods for pre-treating biomass to improve the performance of 
carbonized coffee waste for the removal of organic matter from coffee wastewater and 
drinking water sources, including any pesticide and pharmaceutical residues. Leveraging 
common techniques used to improve activated carbons (e.g. base activation), researchers have 
shown that coffee waste soaked in ash water, then dried and carbonized, improves the 
performance of coffee waste biochars in low-cost water treatment scenarios. 
Researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder have also developed and piloted a low-cost 
method for regenerating saturated biochar using high heat in oxygen-limited environments. In 
some cases, the regenerated char is even more effective after regeneration, on a mass basis. 
Considering that the regeneration process consumes some biochar, the net result is a smaller 
mass of improved biochar that has a similar capacity to the larger mass of raw biochar. 
Discharging untreated wet mill run-off into waterways is an illegal practice in rural China, so YCT 
is tasking CU Boulder students with designing biofilters capable of removing organic materials 
from coffee washing effluent. When biochar production ramps up, they also plan to incorporate 
biochar in soils in test plots to evaluate the impacts of biochar on coffee yields and quality. 
 
COLOMBIA: LAPALMA Y EL TUCAN COFFEE FARM 
Main Focus:  improve coffee quality and yield 
The focus of this multi-year project which began in late 2016 is to assess biochar’s impact on 
soil nutrients and quality, coffee yield and quality, and GHG emissions in an organically-
managed coffee farm (Figure 14). Seedlings at two different stages of development, 2 weeks 
and 6 weeks, were planted in an area which had previously been poorly maintained and thus 
produced low quality beans. Biochar was created on-farm using prunings from shade trees and 
older non-productive arabica coffee trees which are normally either left to decompose or piled 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
25 | P a g e  
 
up and combusted. Carbonization was done using a metal Kon-Tiki kiln and the biochar was 
blended with compost (30% of blend was biochar, by volume).  
As it takes coffee trees 3 – 4 years before they begin producing usable cherries, the results of 
this project are not complete. A number of measurements for soils and yields are being taken 
including:  
• soil measurements: carbon, pH, available 
and total NPK, bulk density, cation 
exchange capacity and saturation;   
• growth in the first 2 years: tree height, 
stem lengths, leaf count and possibly leaf 
analysis; and 
• yield in more than 2 years: fruit produced 
per tree, weight and yield (volume) of 
cherries, weight and yield of sorted 
cherries, parchment coffee and green 
coffee. 
  
TANZANIA: BLACK EARTH PROJECT 
Main Focus:  Improve soil fertility and resilience 
Based on biochar trial results showing 35% increases in yield with 50% reduction in input costs 
in Rwanda (described in the 1st version of this white paper), Radio Lifeline expanded coffee and 
biochar trials into Tanzania with funding provided by the German Investment Corporation 
(DEG) in collaboration with the Tembo Coffee Company and MIICO, a network of community 
agricultural development organizations. Farmers in Tanzania have been experiencing increased 
drought and are focused on improving water holding capacity in soils. 
Low cost kilns made from used oil drums are used to make biochar from a variety of 
underutilized biomass including corn or coffee husks, tree prunings, etc. Field officers from 
Tembo and staff members from MIICO were trained on biochar production and use. This group 
then taught more than 7,000 farmers from both communities across Southern Tanzania how to 
make and apply biochar for growing coffee. 
Figure 14: Biochar compost being used to help retain 
moisture and boost growth of young coffee trees. Credit: R. 
Canal. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
26 | P a g e  
 
Six different applications were 
tested on mature coffee trees: NPK 
only, compost only, biochar + NPK1, 
biochar + compost, biochar + NPK2, 
and biochar only. The first-round 
harvest showed a cherry production 
volume increase of 10 – 43 times 
more over fertilizer alone (Figure 
15). It should be noted that this 
growing season included extended 
drought, hail and an outbreak of 
coffee cherry disease. The trees 
planted with biochar in combination 
with compost or fertilizer also produced more ‘first grade’ beans. In a tasting (also called 
cupping) analysis, coffee produced from beans harvested in the biochar enriched trees scored 
on average 2 points higher on the Specialty Coffee Association of America’s 100-point quality 
cupping scale than coffee grown in soils without biochar. 
Using a relative scale of -2 to 5, Figure 16 compares the general tree aspect (color, branches, 
leaves) and cherry volume (size and 
number) of the different applications 
showing a clear tendency for a 
combination of compost or fertilizer 
with biochar as providing more robust 
trees.  
In a separate trial, freshly planted coffee 
seedlings with biochar + NPK or NPK 
alone in both full sun and shade 
scenarios were compared. In both 
scenarios, biochar-treated trees 
outperformed NPK-only treated trees 
after the first month.  
LAOS: JHAI COFFEE HOUSE 
Main Focus: Residue management & improved farmer livelihood, natural farming 
Filanthrope is a non-profit organization which works with and supports indigenous, ethnic-
minority coffee growing communities in India, Indonesia, Laos and Vietnam. The focus of their 
work is to empower communities with knowledge and technical skills about that which they 
rely upon for their livelihood: coffee. Filanthrope works to realign the coffee value-chain in 
Figure 16: Comparison of biochar trial results in Tanzania; source: Peter 
Kettler 
Figure 15: Tanzania Coffee trial results 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
27 | P a g e  
 
order to alleviate poverty, re-establish healthy ecosystems, and create a healthy social 
environment for communities based on principles of compassion, truth, dignity, and open-
source knowledge sharing.  
Working with the Jhai Coffee House in Laos, Filanthrope purchased a gasifier powered roaster 
(USD 250) capable of roasting 2 kg of coffee per batch (Figure 17). The unit uses less than one 
watt-hour of electricity per kg of beans and runs on coffee husks. The gasifier enabled the 
community to sell brewed coffee for USD 40/kg compared to previously earning only USD 3/kg 
for green coffee, thereby paying for itself in a few hours. 
The resulting biochar can be used in compost or to harvest and filter the sugars and nutrients 
from coffee waste water after which it is converted into animal feed additive. 
 
Figure 17: gasifier used to roast coffee beans. Credit Paul Olivier, inventor of the micro-gasifier. 
    
UGANDA: NKG TROPICAL FARM MANAGEMENT (NEUMANN KAFFEE GRUPPE) 
Main Focus: Residue management & improved soil fertility 
 
NKG Tropical Farm Management grows Robusta coffee on 1,600 ha on the Kaweri Coffee 
Plantation in Uganda. Large amounts of coffee residues are generated from the milling process. 
Biochar has been produced on the farm using a simple drum over a fire since 2016. Initially, 
biochar was made from wood pruned from coffee trees, but nowadays it is made exclusively 
from coffee husks as both a residue management process and as a means to improve soil 
structure to ultimately improve water and nutrient management.   
 
A single laborer can produce 64 tons of biochar per growing season which is incorporated into 
compost made up of 20% coffee husks, 50% pulp, 20% biochar and 10% top soil. The 
composting process is still being optimized but currently takes about 8 weeks to finish.  
50L/plant of biochar-compost blend is used for new field plantings per tree, of which 2.3 kg is 
biochar. The blend is deposited in a hole (80 – 100 cm in diameter and ca. 30-40 cm deep) prior 
to placing the tree. On average the farm spends USD 1,050 per ha for the biochar compost.   

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
28 | P a g e  
 
 
In 2016, the first 4.5 ha of new trees were planted and a control set of 100 trees was planted 
nearby so that a comparison could be made. While it seemed that the biochar-enriched 
compost initially immobilized nitrogen 2 months after planting the trees were growing well and 
there is now a visible size difference in these trees. An additional 18 ha of new trees were 
planted with biochar compost in 2017. The farm aims to plant about 20 ha per annum onwards, 
using biochar compost, although mixture and application rates may change, based on field 
results. 
 
NKG Tropical Farm Management, a Neumann Group owned company, manages coffee farms in 
Latin American and Africa. Their focus is on producing better, more sustainable coffee. They 
have been working towards rolling out biochar use in a growing number of the farms under 
their management in Uganda, Brazil, Mexico and other countries. 
 
ETHIOPIA: THE BIOCHAR FOR SUSTAINABLE SOILS (B4SS) PROJECT 
Main Focus: Residue management & improved soil fertility 
 
The Biochar for Sustainable Soils (B4SS) Project in Ethiopia was carried out by Jimma University 
from April 2015 to September 2018. The B4SS project helped to expand the long-term trials 
that Jimma University has conducted since 2011 on fields managed by both researchers and 
farmers to evaluate the effects of various biochar formulations on maize and soybeans. Around 
Jimma, coffee residues are a health hazard since this material is left to decompose in 
uncontrolled piles that attract flies and other insects. B4SS has leveraged this waste to produce 
biochar. The materials of the biochar formulations prepared by Jimma University include 
compost from coffee husk, coffee husk-derived biochar, cattle and chicken manure, chemical 
fertilizers, bone meal, and bone char. On average, the formulation that consists of biochar from 
coffee husk co-composted with animal manure in concrete blocks for about three months 
(Figure 18) 
has 
resulted in 
savings of 
about 40% 
NPK 
fertilizer 
compared 
with the 
Figure 18: Biochar made from coffee husk is co-composted with animal manure in concrete blocks for about 
three months in Jimma University, Ethiopia 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
29 | P a g e  
 
application of 100% NPK fertilizer. These trials are used for demonstration purposes and have 
helped to share knowledge and practice of using biochar for sustainable land management 
(www.biochar.international). 
 
 
VIETNAM: MINIMIZATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE FOR LOW CARBON PRODUCTION 
Main Focus:  Gasifying coffee waste to provide heat for coffee bean drying 
 
Drying coffee beans in Vietnam has become more challenging due to more erratic weather 
patterns. A project funded by the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) demonstrated 
that pyrolysis of coffee husks can provide sufficient heat for drying beans and also produces 
biochar. The project also sought to reduce or reuse organic residues from coffee in order to 
improve the local environment and reduce GHGs.  
 
The PPV300 unit was developed by the Swiss company Ökozentrum (Figure 19) and delivered to 
a 30-member coffee co-op in Vietnam where it converts moist coffee pulp into K-enriched 
biochar (total 33 kg/h) while also 
supplying 150 kilowatt of heat for the 
dryer with a capacity of four tons of 
green coffee. The pyrolysis equipment 
utilizes medium moisture content 
feedstock (up to 54% has been tested, 
but the recommendation for 
customers is a maximum of 40%) and 
the exhaust gas complies with the 
most stringent regulations. The 
resulting biochar produced from 
coffee husks qualifies under the European Biochar Certificate regulations.  
 
Ökozentrum has calculated that for every kWh of energy created, 900 g of CO2-e removed by 
plants enters the pyrolysis system. The process emits 400 g CO2, which results in a net removal 
rate of 500 g CO2 per kWh of useful energy, or -75 tons CO2 for a unit of this size during one 
harvest season running 10 weeks x 100 hours (4 days per week for 24h each day). Using this 
technology could substantially reduce the carbon footprint of coffee production. After the 
coffee harvest season, the pyrolizer could run with rice husk, cashew shells and bamboo - all 
substrates which have already been tested.  
 
Figure 19: PPV300 unit in Vietnam. Photo source: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3rWDJ4qwVhM 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
30 | P a g e  
 
Ökozentrum estimates that from an economic perspective fuel savings contribute about a third 
of the overall benefit while the biochar output could contribute an even larger economic 
benefit when local markets for biochar are available or created. 
 
In 2017 a workshop entitled ‘Pyrolysis Technology Improves Coffee Quality” (Figure 20) was 
hosted by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), REPIC, Hanns R. 
Neumann Foundation (HRNS), Viet Hien Company Ltd., Viet Nam Cleaner Production Center 
(VNCPC) and SOFIES, a Swiss consulting company with the aim of disseminating information on 
the benefits of pyrolysis for low cost, renewable heat and biochar production.  
 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
 
An increasing number of biochar and coffee projects are underway around the globe since the 
publication of the 1st Edition White Paper. Organizations such as Radio Lifeline, NKG Tropical 
Farm Management, and Ökozentrum have secured funding and support to conduct new 
biochar trials or biochar production scenarios. Dr. Ben Evar, after initiating trials in Colombia, 
drafted a biochar and coffee trial methodology, currently unpublished but has been shared 
informally with other projects to aide in establishing and reporting on biochar trials on coffee 
farms. In addition, characterization of biochar made from various coffee waste streams has 
progressed, though there will always be more that can be learned by using different 
technologies and different production parameters.  
Yet there remains much work to be done to scale these efforts up so that they can benefit a 
greater portion of the millions of hectares used to grow coffee and the farmers that tend them.  
Below are a few recommended areas of focus that could inform and support adoption of 
Figure 20: Photos from Pyrolysis Technology Improves Coffee Quality workshop. Source: Ökozentrum 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
31 | P a g e  
 
biochar production and use within the coffee supply chain where excess coffee residues are 
problematic or soils have constraints that biochar application could address. 
 
EDUCATION ON THE BENEFITS OF BIOCHAR & BIOCHAR PRODUCTION  
Peter Kettler, Founder of Radio Lifeline, has perhaps done the most to further education 
amongst coffee farmers in terms of soils, soil amendments and how biochar can improve soils 
while reducing off-farm inputs. Creating a ‘train-the-trainer’ educational program enabled 
thousands of small farmers in Rwanda and Tanzania to learn not only how to make and use 
biochar, but also what it does to the soil and why they should use it to improve soil fertility and 
resilience.  
These types of programs need to be duplicated and customized for different cultures, different 
growing scenarios (e.g. sun vs shade, mono versus mixed, etc.) and deployed. Partnering with 
local community agricultural organizations or coffee co-ops would seem like a wise strategy. 
In addition to educating growers, other major players within the supply chain could benefit 
from more education on the benefits of biochar including buyers, brewers, certification 
companies and development agencies. There are many opportunities to advance knowledge on 
biochar amongst the coffee community including trade shows, expos, conferences, cupping 
events, etc. For example, Kettler spoke about his success in Tanzania and Rwanda at a recent 
World of Coffee event which generated interest from attendees.  
 
COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS TEMPLATES 
While a cost-benefit analysis at the farm or milling station level would be useful, such an 
analysis would be highly specific to the individual parameters of a particular farm or processing 
operation. Nevertheless, the development of a standardized approach to quantifying the costs 
and benefits of using biochar within the coffee industry could help to develop an evidence base 
on net benefits and drive adoption of biochar as growers and millers could more quickly 
determine payback timeframes and understand potential biochar uses and new revenue 
opportunities. 
NKG Tropical Farm Management has begun to quantify the costs per hectare of applying 
biochar-enriched compost to new plantings in large coffee plantations. Moving forward, it will 
be possible to compare the benefits to these trees in terms of yield, disease resistance and tree 
survivability with those from a set of untreated trees. This type of information would be 
beneficial for smallholder farmers as well, to understand the reduction of off-farm purchases 
such as fertilizers and to understand the impact, if any, on tree health and survival from using 
biochar-enriched composts. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
32 | P a g e  
 
 
ON-GOING COORDINATION AMONGST COFFEE AND BIOCHAR PROJECTS 
As occurred while researching the first edition of this white paper, several new coffee and 
biochar projects were identified, and few are in communication with other project teams. 
These newer projects were carried out by practitioners with varying levels of knowledge on the 
topic of coffee cultivation using biochar. Project teams were eager to learn about best 
practices, lessons learned, application methods, equipment, and several other aspects of 
project design. While the Ithaka Institute and IBI were able to share initial information amongst 
the teams, and to connect them with each other during the writing of this second edition white 
paper, an on-going coordination effort would likely prove very beneficial in assisting the various 
coffee and biochar project teams to share information and lessons learned. It may also facilitate 
a wider adoption of the use of biochar in coffee production systems throughout the coffee 
growing community. 
DEMONSTRATIONS OF BIOCHAR & BIOCHAR PRODUCTION WITHIN THE COFFEE INDUSTRY 
The coffee and biochar projects presented in this white paper are all demonstrating promising 
results spurring many of the project teams to replicate and expand their biochar trials. 
However, few are taking full advantage of all the benefits from biochar production by using all 
by-products (e.g. heat, biochar, potentially electricity, wood vinegar, etc.). Some project 
developers are focused on residue management, others on renewable energy production or 
water filtration and others on improved soil fertility. All of these are important but do not 
represent a holistic perspective which can bring maximum benefit and economic development 
to growers and processors. Designing a demonstration project that takes full advantage of all 
potential benefits and quantifying the socio-economic and environmental benefits could be a 
persuasive tool for obtaining funding for such projects. 
OPTIMIZING BIOCHAR IN COFFEE COMPOST 
While biochar and compost is a topic that has received much attention and research, the 
compostable residues available from coffee cultivation and processing have not undergone as 
much research when combined with biochar. As these residues have certain elements that may 
be less beneficial to soils (i.e. caffeine, tannins), fine tuning the compost process to minimize 
these elements is important. Adding biochar to this compost at different rates, for different 
periods of time and in combination with other organic materials (e.g. animal manure) should 
continue to be researched. Trials using different types of biochar-enriched compost should be 
documented to understand which ones work best in different scenarios (e.g. nurseries, new 
plantings, mature trees, sun vs shade grown, etc.).  

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
33 | P a g e  
 
QUANTIFICATION OF CARBON REDUCTIONS USING BIOCHAR 
Although this report has provided a high-level overview of the potential avenues by which the 
introduction of biochar production and use into the coffee supply chain could reduce the 
carbon footprint of coffee, much more research is required to quantify the specific GHG 
emission reductions under different scenarios; e.g. reduced emissions from carbonizing versus 
composting and land application of coffee residues, renewable energy produced from 
carbonizing residues versus using fossil fuels for drying cherries, etc. Once these are quantified, 
it may be possible that financing for biochar production equipment could come from the sale of 
carbon credits. 
The abundance and underutilization of coffee residues represents a potential source of carbon 
sequestration when used as biochar for soil amendment or embedded in other long-lasting 
products. Extrapolating available information on 2017, coffee production, reported as 60 kg 
bags of green coffee, and the relative weight of coffee residues relative to green beans 
generates nearly 2 times the weight of the green beans. Using biochar yield data for the 
different residues that more than 7.5 Mt of biochar could result (Table 4). Applying the relevant 
fixed carbon amount for each waste stream shows that the potential CO2-e just from a soil 
carbon addition perspective would exceed 12,000,000 Mt. Factoring in reduced emissions from 
avoided fossil fuel energy, fertilizers and other sources would likely raise this number much 
higher. At a time when cutting GHG emissions is critical, carbonizing residues which are often 
burned or discarded could be a viable method for companies to reduce their carbon footprint. 
 
Table 4: Potential carbon sequestration from coffee residues 
2017 Green Coffee Production (159.55M bags, 9.6 MMT)  
Residue 
as % 
Green 
bean 
weight 
Global 
volume 
(MMT) 
Biochar 
yield (%) 
Biochar 
yield 
(MMT) 
Fixed 
Carbon 
Total 
Carbon 
(MMT) 
CO2e    
(MMT) 
Pulp 
1 
9.60 
52±1 
4.99 
29.60 
1.48 
5.42 
Parchment 
0.25 
2.40 
27±6 
0.65 
18.10 
0.12 
0.43 
Silver skin/chaff 
0.16 
1.54 
34±2 
0.52 
20.60 
0.11 
0.39 
Spent coffee 
0.542 
5.20 
36±4 
1.87 
18.40 
0.34 
1.26 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
2.05 
7.51 
 
Pulp, parchment, silverskin percentages derived from International Coffee Organization reporting standards; 
Source for data on biochar yield and fixed carbon: Olani, 2018. 
 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
34 | P a g e  
 
CONCLUSION 
Although the use of biochar in coffee cultivation has continued to expand over the past three 
years, this practice is still in its infancy. While it is encouraging that new players within the 
coffee industry are recognizing the value of biochar production and use, there remains a 
significant part of the sector that has never heard of biochar, or that are skeptical of the 
potential benefits offered by its production and use. Investing in biochar education throughout 
the supply chain would help increase the interest and use of biochar. It would also be helpful to 
have more peer-reviewed literature on agronomic and climate change effects of biochar, to 
provide more quantitative evidence on biochar’s impacts. This type of academic rigor could 
help convince the coffee industry to incorporate biochar production and use throughout the 
coffee supply chain. It might also help underpin policy support to decarbonize the industry.   
This White Paper should serve as a first step in clearly articulating the potential benefits of 
biochar in enhancing yield and profitability of coffee production, including for smallholders, and 
enhancing sustainability of coffee supply chains. Furthermore, it demonstrates how biochar can 
reduce climate impacts while also improving resilience to climate change of the coffee industry. 
 
THE AUTHOR 
Kathleen Draper, draper@ithaka-institut.org, is the US Director of the Ithaka Institute. The 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence, which was founded in Valais, Switzerland, with its 
American branch in an office near Rochester, NY, is dedicated to research, education, and 
consulting related to closed-loop biochar solutions which can be implemented in both the 
developing and developed world. Kathleen is actively involved in biochar research including its 
use in building materials and other non-agricultural uses. She is also a Board Member of both 
the International Biochar Initiative and the U.S. Biochar Initiative. Kathleen is a co-author of 
“Burn: Using Fire to Turn Down the Heat” due out in early 2019. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alvum-Toll, K., Karlsson, T., Strom, H., (2011) Biochar as soil amendment: A comparison between plant 
materials for biochar production from three regions in Kenya Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences 
Beltrame, Karla K., André L. Cazetta, Patrícia SC de Souza, Lucas Spessato, Taís L. Silva, and Vitor C. 
Almeida. "Adsorption of caffeine on mesoporous activated carbon fibers prepared from pineapple plant 
leaves." Ecotoxicology and environmental safety 147 (2018): 64-71. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
35 | P a g e  
 
Barnham, B., Weber, J., (2011) “The economic sustainability of certified coffee: recent evidence from 
Mexico and Peru” Elsevier vol 40, pp 1269 – 1279 
Baronti, S., Vaccari, F.P., Miglietta, F., Calzolari, C., Lugato, E., Orlandini, S., Pini, R., Zulian, C., Genesio I., 
(2014) Impact of biochar application on plant water relations in Vitis vinifera (L.). Elsevier European 
Journal of Agronomy vol 53, pp 38 - 44 
Bernal, M.P., Alburquerque, J.A., and Moral, R., (2009). Composting of animal manures and chemical 
criteria for compost maturity assessment. A review. Bioresource Technology, vol 100, pp 5444 – 5453. 
Blinová, Lenka, Maroš Sirotiak, Alica Bartošová, and Maroš Soldán. "Utilization of Waste From Coffee 
Production." Research Papers Faculty of Materials Science and Technology Slovak University of 
Technology 25, no. 40 (2017): 91-101. https://www.degruyter.com/downloadpdf/j/rput.2017.25.issue-
40/rput-2017-0011/rput-2017-0011.pdf  
Bünemann E. K., Schwenke G. D., Van Zwieten L. (2006) Impact of agricultural inputs on soil organisms—
a review. Australian Journal of Soil Research 44, 379-406, 
Cabrera, Alegria, Lucia Cox, K. U. R. T. Spokas, M. C. Hermosín, Juan Cornejo, and W. C. Koskinen. 
"Influence of biochar amendments on the sorption–desorption of aminocyclopyrachlor, bentazone and 
pyraclostrobin pesticides to an agricultural soil." Science of the total environment 470 (2014): 438-443.  
Cardenas-Aguiar, Eliana, Gabriel Gasco, Jorge Paz-Ferreiro, and Ana Mendez. "The effect of biochar and 
compost from urban organic waste on plant biomass and properties of an artificially copper polluted 
soil." International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation 124 (2017): 223-232. 
Cheng, Jianzhong, Xinqing Lee, Weichang Gao, Yi Chen, Wenjie Pan, and Yuan Tang. "Effect of biochar on 
the bioavailability of difenoconazole and microbial community composition in a pesticide-contaminated 
soil." Applied Soil Ecology 121 (2017): 185-192 
Coltro, L., Mourad, A., Oliveira, P., Baddini, J., Kletecke, R., (2006). Environmental Profile of Brazilian 
Green Coffee. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessments. Vol 11 (1) 16 – 21 
Cornelissen, Gerard, Naba Raj Pandit, Paul Taylor, Bishnu Hari Pandit, Magnus Sparrevik, and Hans Peter 
Schmidt. "Emissions and Char Quality of Flame-Curtain" Kon Tiki" Kilns for Farmer-Scale 
Charcoal/Biochar Production." PLoS One 11, no. 5 (2016): e0154617. 
Dahal, N., Bajracharya, R. M., & Wagle, L. M. Biochar Effects on Carbon Stocks in the Coffee Agroforestry 
Systems of the Himalayas. 
Delwiche K, Lehmann J and Walter T (2014). Atrazine leaching from biochar-amended soils. 
Chemosphere 95, 346-352. 
Domingues, Rimena R., Paulo F. Trugilho, Carlos A. Silva, Isabel Cristina NA de Melo, Leônidas CA Melo, 
Zuy M. Magriotis, and Miguel A. Sánchez-Monedero. "Properties of biochar derived from wood and 
high-nutrient biomasses with the aim of agronomic and environmental benefits." PloS one 12, no. 5 
(2017): e0176884. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
36 | P a g e  
 
Draper, K (2014) “Biochar Paper: Elevating biochar from novelty to ubiquity” accessed on December 1, 
2014 at http://www.biochar-journal.org/en/ct/15-Biochar-Paper-%E2%80%93-elevating-biochar-from-
novelty-to-ubiquity-  
Edgerton, A., Williams, A., Perez, M., (April 23, 2013) “Coffee Fungus Spurs Central American Migration 
Plans: Jobs”.  Accessed on January 12, 2015 at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-23/coffee-
fungus-spurs-central-america-migration-plans-jobs.html 
Elias de Melo Virginio Filho Carlos Astorga Domian, ‘Prevención y control de la roya del café Manual de 
buenas prácticas para técnicos y facilitadores’ November 2015,  Centro Agronómico Tropical de 
Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE) accessed on May 10, 2018 
https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/media/documents/Manual_Roya_Completo.pdf 
Fairtrade Foundation. https://www.fairtrade.org.uk/Farmers-and-Workers/Coffee  
Galanakis, C. M. (Ed.). (2017). Handbook of Coffee Processing By-products: Sustainable Applications. 
Academic Press. 
Imbach, Pablo, Emily Fung, Lee Hannah, Carlos E. Navarro-Racines, David W. Roubik, Taylor H. Ricketts, 
Celia A. Harvey et al. "Coupling of pollination services and coffee suitability under climate change." 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, no. 39 (2017): 10438-10442.  
International Coffee Organization Annual Report 2016/17;  
http://www.ico.org/documents/cy2017-18/annual-review-website-e.pdf 
Jien, S., Wang, CS (2013) Effects of biochar on soil properties and erosion potential in a highly weathered 
soil. Catena. Volume 110, November 2013, Pages 225–233 
Kammann C, Glaser B, Schmidt HP (2015). Combining biochar and organic amendments. In Shackley et 
al. Biochar in European Soils and Agriculture, Routledge, London 
Kookana, Rai S. The role of biochar in modifying the environmental fate, bioavailability, and efficacy of 
pesticides in soils: a review. Soil Research 48.7 (2010): 627-637. 
Lehmann, J., Gaunt J., and Rondon M. (2006) Bio-char sequestration in terrestrial ecosystems - a review. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 11, 403-427. 
Lehmann, J., & Joseph, S. (Eds.). (2015). Biochar for environmental management: science, technology 
and implementation. Routledge.  
Li, R., Wang, J. J., Zhou, B., Zhang, Z., Liu, S., Lei, S., & Xiao, R. (2017). Simultaneous capture removal of 
phosphate, ammonium and organic substances by MgO impregnated biochar and its potential use in 
swine wastewater treatment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 147, 96-107. 
Liu, Shou-Heng, and Yi-Yang Huang. "Valorization of coffee grounds to biochar-derived adsorbents for 
CO 2 adsorption." Journal of Cleaner Production 175 (2018): 354-360. 
Manariotis, I., Karapanagioti, H., Werner, D., (2014). Novel sorbent materials for environmental 
remediation. European Geosciences Union General Assembly, Vol. 16, p. 10952. 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
37 | P a g e  
 
Navichoc, D., Soto, M., Rivera, L., Killian, B. (2012). Carbon Footprint Across the Coffee Supply Chain: The 
Case of Costa Rican Coffee.  Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology. Vol 3, Issue 3, pages 151 – 
170  
Olani, Dessalegn Dadi. “Valorization of coffee byproducts via biomass conversion technologies.” (2018) 
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/153422082.pdf  
Quosai, P., Anstey, A., Mohanty, A. K., & Misra, M. (2018). Characterization of biocarbon generated by 
high-and low-temperature pyrolysis of soy hulls and coffee chaff: for polymer composite applications. 
Royal Society open science, 5(8), 171970. 
Rahayu, Dwi Suci, and Niken Puspita Sari. "Development of Pratylenchus coffeae in Biochar Applied Soil, 
Coffee Roots and Its Effect on Plant Growth." Pelita Perkebunan (a Coffee and Cocoa Research Journal) 
33, no. 1 (2017): 24-32. 
Reddy, G. K., Nagender T., and Yerasi P. K. R. (2013). Biochar and its potential benefits - a review. 
Environment and Ecology. V 31, pages 2000 – 2005 
Sanchez-Monedero, M. A., M. L. Cayuela, A. Roig, Keiji Jindo, C. Mondini, and N. Bolan. "Role of biochar 
as an additive in organic waste composting." Bioresource technology (2017).  
Sanchez-Monedero, Hoeck, J. "Compost and Biochar.” Webinar, IBI Biochar Webinar Series, February 
2017.  
Schmidt, H.P., Taylor, P., (2014) Kon-Tiki - the democratization of biochar production. The Biochar 
Journal; accessed January 3, 2015; http://www.biochar-journal.org/en/ct/39-Kon-Tiki-the-
democratization-of-biochar-production  
Schweikle, J., Spreer, W., Sringarm, K., Karaj, S., Santasup, C. and Müller, J., Analysis of Biochar from 
Different Kinds of Feedstock and Varying Pyrolysis Temperature I: Chemical and Microscopic Properties. 
Sehar, Anum & Jabeen, Khajista & Iqbal, Sumera & Rasul, Fahd & Javad, Sumera. (2017). Assessment of 
biochar and compost antifungal potential against botryodiplodia theobromae. PAT. 14. 585-589.  
Taha, Sherif M., Mohamed E. Amer, Ashraf E. Elmarsafy, and Mohamed Y. Elkady. "Adsorption of 15 
different pesticides on untreated and phosphoric acid treated biochar and charcoal from water." Journal 
of Environmental Chemical Engineering 2, no. 4 (2014): 2013-2025.  
Tang, Jingchun, Zhu Wenying, Kookana Rai, and Katayama Arata (2013). Characteristics of biochar and its 
application in remediation of contaminated soil. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering. 
Taylor, David A (2007). Certified Coffee: Does the Premium Pay Off? Environ Health Perspect; 115(9): 
A456–A459. 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (2004). Fertilizer use by crop in Brazil. Rome: FAO. p 
30 

 
 
Ithaka Institute for Carbon Intelligence and International Biochar Initiative; October 2018  
38 | P a g e  
 
Van Rikxoort, H., Schroth, G., Laderach, P., Rodriguez-Sanchez, B., (2014) Carbon footprint and carbon 
stocks reveal climate friendly coffee production INRA and Springer-Verlog 
Vardon, Derek R., Bryan R. Moser, Wei Zheng, Katie Witkin, Roque L. Evangelista, Timothy J. Strathmann, 
Kishore Rajagopalan,and Brajendra K. Sharma (2013) Complete Utilization of Spent Coffee Grounds To 
Produce Biodiesel, Bio-Oil, and Biochar. ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering 
Wang, C., Lu, H., Dong, D., Deng, H., Strong, P.J., Wang, H. and Wu, W. (2013). Insight into the Effects of 
Biochar on Manure Composting: Evidence Supporting the Relationship between N2O Emissions and 
Denitrifying Community. Environmental Science & Technology, vol  47. 
Weinberg, Bennett and Bealer, Bonnie. The World of Caffeine: The Science and Culture of the World’s 
Most Popular Drug New York and London: Routledge, 2002 p. 237 
Yu, Xiangyang & Pan, Ligang & Ying, Guangguo & Kookana, Rai. (2010). Enhanced and irreversible 
sorption of pesticide pyrimethanil by soil amended with biochars. Journal of environmental sciences 
(China). 22. 615-20. 10.1016/S1001-0742(09)60153-4. 
