Neuron 52, 155–168, October 5, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.
DOI 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.020
Review
Neural Synchrony in Brain
Disorders: Relevance for Cognitive
Dysfunctions and Pathophysiology
Peter J. Uhlhaas1,2,* and Wolf Singer1,3
1Department of Neurophysiology
Max Planck Institute for Brain Research
Deutschordenstrasse 46
Frankfurt am Main, 60528
Germany
2Laboratory for Neurophysiology and Neuroimaging
Department of Psychiatry
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University
Heinrich-Hoffmann-Strasse 10
Frankfurt am Main, 60528
Germany
3Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University
Max-von-Laue-Strasse 1
Frankfurt am Main, 60438
Germany
Following the discovery of context-dependent syn-
chronization of oscillatory neuronal responses in the
visual system, novel methods of time series analysis
have been developed for the examination of task- and
performance-related oscillatory activity and its syn-
chronization. Studies employing these advanced tech-
niques revealed that synchronization of oscillatory
responses in the b- and g-band is involved in a variety
of cognitive functions, such as perceptual grouping,
attention-dependent stimulus selection, routing of sig-
nals across distributed cortical networks, sensory-
motor integration, working memory, and perceptual
awareness. Here, we review evidence that certain brain
disorders, such as schizophrenia, epilepsy, autism,
Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s are associated
with abnormal neural synchronization. The data sug-
gest close correlations between abnormalities in
neuronal synchronization and cognitive dysfunctions,
emphasizing the importance of temporal coordination.
Thus, focused search for abnormalities in temporal
patterning may be of considerable clinical relevance.
Introduction
Most of the brain’s cognitive functions are based on the
coordinated interactions of large numbers of neurons
that are distributed within and across different special-
ized brain areas. A fundamental, yet unresolved, prob-
lem of modern neuroscience is how this coordination is
achieved. Integration and segregation of neural activity
needs to occur at various spatial and temporal scales,
and these scales must be dynamically adjusted depend-
ing on the nature of the respective cognitive tasks.
In contrast to the large number of studies that investi-
gated the role of synchrony in a wide range of cognitive
and executive processes, relatively few investigations
have examined the possible relevance of neural syn-
chrony in pathological brain states, such as schizophre-
nia, epilepsy, autism, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Until recently, most of the investigations of electro-
physiological correlates of pathological brain states
concentrated on the analysis of power distributions in
various frequency bands of resting-state electroence-
phalograpic (EEG) activity, or on the search for abnor-
malities in averaged, event related potentials (ERPs)
(John et al., 1988). Relatively few studies have examined
task- and performance-related synchronization phe-
nomena in a clinical context because the methods re-
quired for the determination of synchrony have become
available only recently (e.g., Lachaux et al., 1999; Tass
et al., 1998).
Therefore, we focus this review on studies that specif-
ically investigated neural synchrony in association with
circumscribed impairments in cognition in schizophre-
nia, epilepsy, autism, and AD. Furthermore, we review
recent data on the relation between abnormal synchro-
nization and motor deﬁcits in Parkinson’s disease (PD).
In addition to the obvious medical relevance of this
research, further insights into the underlying pathophys-
iological mechanisms are also likely to enhance our un-
derstanding of normal brain functions. Speciﬁcally, we
hope that these correlations between neural synchrony
and pathological brain states will shed some new light
on the respective pathophysiological mechanisms and
the role of synchrony in normal brain functions. We con-
centrate on noninvasive studies with EEG and magneto-
enecephalography (MEG), as these methods have the re-
quired temporal resolution to assess neural synchrony.
In addition, because the database on neural synchrony
established with these methods in disease-related stud-
ies is still sparse, we also review investigations based on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) since they can pro-
vide evidence, albeit indirectly, on abnormalities of struc-
tural and functional connectivity between cortical areas
that predict disturbances in large-scale synchronization.
Distributed Processing and Neuronal
Synchronization
Due to the distributed organization of sensory systems,
the representation of sensory objects requires integra-
tion of responses across different cortical regions. The
reason is that even basic features of an object are pro-
cessed in parallel in different, specialized areas of the
cortex. This intramodal integration must be comple-
mented by mechanisms permitting binding of signals
across different sensory modalities, since many objects
encountered in the world are multisensory and possess,
in various combinations, visual, auditory, haptic, and
olfactory properties. In addition, at all levels of sensory
processing, neuronal activity is shaped by top-down at-
tentional mechanisms that dynamically select and bind
sensory signals in a context-dependent way as a func-
tion of expectancies and a priori knowledge (Engel
et al., 2001; Fries et al., 2001a). Finally, dynamic and
ﬂexible binding between sensory and motor areas is
required to allow for the versatility of sensory-motor
coordination (Roelfsema et al., 1997).
Transient synchronization of neuronal discharges
has been proposed as one possible mechanism to
*Correspondence: uhlhaas@mpih-frankfurt.mpg.de

dynamically bind widely distributed sets of neurons into
functionally coherent ensembles that represent the neu-
ral correlates of a cognitive content or a motor program
(Singer, 1999). This hypothesis ﬁrst received experimen-
tal support from investigations on feature binding in
vision (Gray et al., 1989). However, neural synchrony
also seems relevant for large-scale integration of distrib-
uted neural activity since it occurs across distant corti-
cal areas, such as, for example, across visual areas in
the two hemispheres (Engel et al., 1991), and is modu-
lated in a task- and attention-dependent way (Roelfsema
et al., 1997). Furthermore, studies in human subjects
combining noninvasive recording techniques such as
EEG and MEG with advanced methods of time series
analysis have revealed that neural synchrony is associ-
ated with cognitive functions that require large-scale
integration of distributed neural activity. Examples are
attention-dependent stimulus selection, multimodal in-
tegration, working memory, selective routing of activity,
and conscious processing of stimuli (for a review see
Singer, 1999; Schnitzler and Gross, 2005; and Varela
et al., 2001). Synchronization in these studies was con-
sistently associated with an oscillatory patterning of
neuronal responses, most often in the b- (15–30 Hz)
and g- (30–80 Hz) frequency range. Subsequent research
has indicated that such high-frequency oscillations
are particularly effective in supporting precise synchro-
nization of neuronal discharges (Fries et al., 2001b). In
general, there is a correlation between the distance
over
which
synchronization
is
observed
and
the
frequency of the synchronized oscillations. Short dis-
tance synchronization tends to occur at higher frequen-
cies (g-band) than long-distance synchronization, which
often manifests itself in the b- but also in the q- (4–8 Hz)
and a- (8–12 Hz) frequency range (Kopell et al., 2000;
Schnitzler and Gross, 2005; von Stein and Sarnthein,
2000).
Measures of Oscillatory Activity and Synchrony
Recording methods that assess the activity of large
populations of neurons, such as microelectrode record-
ings of local ﬁeld potentials (LFPs) or EEG- and MEG-
registrations, can only detect neuronal activity if it
exhibits some degree of synchrony. Entirely uncoordi-
nated activity would not be detectable because the cur-
rents of synaptic events, which are the major source of
the measured signals (Mitzdorf and Singer, 1979), would
cancel out.
In most cases, the signals recorded from neuron pop-
ulations consist of oscillations that cover a broad fre-
quency spectrum and are usually quantiﬁed by comput-
ing the relative power in distinct frequency bands. Until
a decade ago, the most frequently applied technique for
this spectral decomposition was the Fourier analysis.
This classical method has recently been complemented
by wavelet-based techniques (Bertrand et al., 1994) and
multitaper analyses (Mitra and Pesaran, 1999), which are
better adapted for the spectral decomposition of non-
stationary time series.
In addition to analyzing the frequency spectrum of
spontaneous oscillations, it is of interest to determine
the time course of stimulus- or task-related oscillations.
Two forms of stimulus-related oscillatory activity need
to be distinguished: (1) evoked and 2) induced oscil-
lations (Tallon-Baudry and Bertrand, 1999). Evoked os-
cillations are strictly phase-locked to the onset of a
stimulus and, therefore, can be measured by stimulus-
triggered
averaging
of
responses.
Although
these
evoked oscillations are related to early, stimulus-driven
encoding processes, they are state-dependent and can
be modulated by top-down processes such as attention
(Herrmann et al., 2004; Tiitinen et al., 1993). In contrast,
induced oscillations appear in association with stimu-
lus-triggered cognitive processes, but reﬂect self-paced
temporal coordination of neuronal responses. They are
not phase-locked with external events, and are therefore
abolished by averaging. These induced oscillations typ-
ically occur in the b- and g-frequency range and appear
in association with a large variety of cognitive pro-
cesses, ranging from the construction of coherent per-
cepts (Tallon-Baudry and Bertrand, 1999) to focused
attention (Fries et al., 2001a) and the preparation of
movements (Murphy and Fetz, 1996).
Although the amplitude of LFP, EEG, or MEG signals
correlates with the degree of synchrony of neuronal re-
sponses, there are numerous confounding variables
that make it difﬁcult to draw ﬁrm conclusions on syn-
chrony by considering only amplitude measures. Among
these are the size and the alignment of the dipole ﬁelds
of the contributing neurons, the fraction of synchro-
nously active neurons in the population of cells con-
tributing to the signal, and, above all, the degree of
precision with which the neuronal discharges are syn-
chronized. The latter variable is particularly critical when
neurons engage in high-frequency oscillatory activity. In
this case, the precision of synchrony needs to be in the
millisecond range in order to permit effective summation
of synaptic currents and to yield a measurable signal.
Therefore, methods have been developed which permit
assessment of synchrony independently of amplitude
(Lachaux et al., 1999; Tass et al., 1998; Zeitler et al.,
2006). In essence, they determine separately for differ-
ent frequency bands the precision and intertrial variance
of phase relations between signals recorded simulta-
neously from different sites.
These measures need to be distinguished from mea-
sures of ‘‘coherence,’’ which determine the covariance
of the amplitude of oscillations recorded from different
sites for the various frequency bands (Andrew and
Pfurtscheller, 1996). Both phase synchronization and
coherence have been used to assess functional cou-
pling among distributed neuronal populations (Rodri-
guez et al., 1999; Bressler et al., 1993).
Finally, measures for large-scale coordination of neu-
ronal activity have also been derived from covariations
of the amplitudes and latencies of hemodynamic signals
in different brain regions (Friston et al., 1993). Although
this method has very low temporal resolution and
cannot assess the synchrony of evoked and induced os-
cillatory activity, it provides indications on functional
connectivity and can contribute to the identiﬁcation
of the distributed networks supporting particular cogni-
tive processes. Because clinical studies using mea-
surements of phase synchronization to determine deﬁ-
ciencies in temporal coordination are still sparse, we
also included in this review selected studies that applied
coherence analysis to EEG and MEG signals and dis-
cuss fMRI data on functional connectivity.
Neuron
156

Neural Synchrony: Anatomical Substrate
and Neurotransmitters
Studies involving lesions (Engel et al., 1991) and devel-
opmental manipulations (Lo¨ wel and Singer, 1992) indi-
cate that neural synchronization in the high-frequency
range (b- and g-band) is mainly mediated by cortico-
cortical connections that reciprocally link cells situated
in the same cortical area, but also cells distributed
across different areas and even across the two hemi-
spheres. Accordingly, synchronization probability be-
tween neurons reﬂects the anatomical layout of ex-
citatory cortico-cortical connections (Schmidt et al.,
1997a, 1997b). Direct evidence for the synchronizing
function
of
reciprocal
cortico-cortical
connections
comes from the ﬁnding that section of the corpus cal-
losum abolishes synchronization of induced oscillatory
responses between neurons located in different hemi-
spheres (Engel et al., 1991). These and related studies in-
dicate that cortical mechanisms dominate in the genera-
tion and precise synchronization of high-frequency
oscillatory activity in the b- and g-frequency bands. In
contrast, subcortical structures, and especially the thal-
amus, appear to dominate in the generation and syn-
chronization of oscillatory activity in the lower frequency
bands (a, q, D, and below) (Steriade, 2005; Llinas and
Steriade, 2006). However, more research is needed to
clarify how exactly cortical and subcortical mechanisms
cooperate in the generation and synchronization of
rhythmic activity in the various frequency bands.
The generation and synchronization of cortical b- and
g-oscillations involves several neurotransmitter sys-
tems. GABAergic neurons play a pivotal role in the pri-
mary generation of high-frequency oscillations and their
local synchronization, whereas glutamatergic connec-
tions appear to control their strength, duration, and
long-range synchronization (Traub et al., 2004; Wang
and Buzsaki, 1996). Recent evidence indicates that cho-
linergic modulation plays a crucial role in the fast, state-
dependent facilitation of high-frequency oscillations
and the associated response synchronization (Rodri-
guez et al., 2004; Steriade et al., 1991; Wespatat et al.,
2004). In addition to chemical synaptic transmission,
direct electrotonic coupling through gap junctions be-
tween inhibitory neurons also contributes to the tempo-
ral patterning of population activity and, in particular,
to the precise synchronization of oscillatory activity
(Draguhn et al., 1998; Fukuda et al., 2006; Hormuzdi
et al., 2001; Nase et al., 2003; Traub et al., 2001).
Neural Synchrony in Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder with an esti-
mated life-time prevalence of 1%. The disorder is char-
acterized by psychotic symptoms (delusions, hallucina-
tions), negative symptoms (ﬂattening of affect, apathy),
and disorganization of thought and behavior. Cognitive
dysfunctions are prominent throughout the course of
schizophrenia and have been shown to be a better pre-
dictor for outcome than the overt symptoms, suggesting
that cognitive deﬁcits represent a core pathology of the
disorder (Green, 1996). The pathophysiological mecha-
nisms leading to the overt symptoms and deﬁcits in cog-
nition are, however, largely unknown.
Current theories of schizophrenia (Friston, 1999; Phil-
lips and Silverstein, 2003) emphasize that core aspects
of the pathophysiology are due to deﬁcits in the coordi-
nation of distributed processes that both involve multi-
ple cortical areas and are associated with speciﬁc cog-
nitive deﬁcits. Some of the deﬁcits concern functions,
such as working memory, attention, and perceptual or-
ganization, that have been proposed to involve synchro-
nization of oscillatory activity in the high-frequency band
(b and g) (Phillips and Silverstein, 2003). Impairments in
perceptual organization as are found in schizophrenia
lead to very circumscribed deﬁcits in experimental
tasks. These deﬁcits can produce superior performance
relative to controls in tasks in which contextual informa-
tion and dynamic grouping have a distractive effect. This
underlines the speciﬁcity of the disease-related impair-
ment of perceptual grouping functions (for a review,
see Uhlhaas and Silverstein, 2005).
A substantial body of EEG studies supports the hy-
pothesis that schizophrenia is related to impaired neural
synchrony. Examination of auditory and visual steady-
state responses to repetitive stimulation in patients with
schizophrenia has revealed a speciﬁc reduction in the
power of the stimulus-locked response in the b- and
g-frequency range, but not in the lower frequencies
(Kwon et al., 1999; Krishnan et al., 2005). This could be
due to reduced synchronization of stimulus-evoked
high-frequency oscillations and/or an inability of neu-
rons to follow high stimulation rates. Moreover, there
is evidence for a reduction of evoked stimulus-locked
oscillatory activity, again in the high-frequency range,
following auditory and visual stimuli. Reductions in
evoked oscillatory activity have been reported for tasks
involving visual binding (Spencer et al., 2003, 2004), for
backward-masking (Wynn et al., 2005) and in the audi-
tory oddball-paradigm (Gallinat et al., 2004). Further-
more, there is also preliminary evidence for reduction
of induced, non-stimulus-locked oscillations in the
g-band range during the processing of visual stimuli
(Green et al., 2003; Haig et al., 2000). These results sug-
gest selective deﬁciencies in the ability of cortical net-
works or cortico-thalamo-cortical loops to engage in
precisely synchronized high-frequency oscillations.
In addition to these analyses of spectral power of
evoked oscillatory activity, several studies have exam-
ined phase synchrony between distributed neuronal
populations while patients performed cognitive tasks
(Slewa-Younan et al., 2004; Spencer et al., 2003; Sy-
mond et al., 2005; Uhlhaas et al., 2006). In a recent study
(Uhlhaas et al., 2006), we provided evidence for a close
relation between impaired neural synchrony in schizo-
phrenia and speciﬁc cognitive deﬁcits (see Figure 1)
using Mooney faces as stimuli. Mooney faces consist
of degraded pictures of human faces where all shades
of gray are removed, thus leaving only black and white
contours. Schizophrenia patients exhibited a deﬁcit in
the perception of Mooney faces and reduced phase syn-
chrony in the b-band, while the power of induced g-band
oscillations was in the normal range. This suggests that
large-scale synchronization is crucially impaired in
patients with schizophrenia, while local synchrony in the
g-band is largely intact. Indirect, but compatible, evi-
dence for deﬁcits in large-scale coordination in schizo-
phrenia comes from fMRI studies that have reported re-
duced functional connectivity, i.e., reduced covariance
of BOLD signals, for a wide range of cognitive tasks
Review
157

(Honey et al., 2005; Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2005;
Schlosser et al., 2003).
Impairments in the ability of distributed networks to
establish precise synchronization of neuronal assem-
blies oscillating at high frequencies can have many rea-
sons. These comprise both a host of local factors that
determine the time constants of interactions within the
oscillating microcircuits and the properties of long-dis-
tance connections that mediate interareal synchroniza-
tion. Abnormalities have been identiﬁed for some of
these candidate mechanisms in schizophrenia patients.
In vivo anatomical examination with diffusion tensor im-
aging (DTI) has revealed white matter anomalies that
might be related to deﬁciencies in long-range synchroni-
zation (for a review see Kubicki et al., 2006). Cortico-cor-
tical connections were reduced in the frontal, temporal,
and parietal lobes, and between the two hemispheres.
However, there is also evidence for locally increased
connectivity that is related to productive symptoms,
such as auditory hallucinations (Hubl et al., 2004). One in-
terpretation of these seemingly paradoxical ﬁndings is
that hyperconnectivity between higher- and lower-order
cortical areas favors backpropagation to the respective
primary sensory cortices of oscillatory activity generated
in higher sensory areas during visual and auditory imag-
ery, thus generating activation patterns that resemble
those induced by sensory stimulation. This interpreta-
tion receives some support by the ﬁnding that hallucina-
tions are associated with the following: (1) increased g-
oscillations in the corresponding sensory areas of the
cerebral cortex (Lee et al., 2006); (2) long-range synchro-
nization (Uhlhaas et al., 2006), and (3) increased hemody-
namic responses (BOLD signal) in the respective primary
sensory areas (Dierks et al., 1999). For several reasons,
this increased BOLD signal is likely to reﬂect the entrain-
ment of neurons in the primary areas into synchronized,
high-frequency oscillations: ﬁrst, it is improbable that
neurons in primary sensory areasexhibit major increases
in discharge rates in the absence of sensory stimulation.
Second, top-down effects, such as those associated
with focused attention, cause an entrainment of selected
neuronal populations into well-synchronized g-oscilla-
tions without enhancing the discharge rates (Fries
et al., 2001a). Third, increases of the BOLD signal corre-
late much better with the entrainment of neurons into
synchronized high-frequency g-oscillations than with in-
creases in discharge rates (Niessing et al., 2005).
Further candidate mechanisms for deﬁcient synchro-
nization in the high-frequency range are abnormalities in
the rhythm-generating networks of inhibitory interneu-
rons and abnormalities in the glutamatergic neurons
mediating long-distance synchronization. Abnormalities
in GABAergic inhibitory neurons (Lewis et al., 2005)
and NMDA-receptor dysregulation (Moghaddam, 2003)
have both been found in patients with schizophrenia.
The possible role of NMDA-receptors in the pathophys-
iology of schizophrenia is supported by the acute effects
of NMDA antagonists, such as ketamine or phencycli-
dine (PCP), on healthy volunteers. For example, sub-
anaesthetic doses of ketamine produce an acute psy-
chosis that includes many of the symptoms and
characteristic cognitive dysfunctions of schizophrenia
(Krystal et al., 1994). Hypofunctioning of the NMDA-
receptor in schizophrenia is also compatible with the
dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, as NMDA an-
tagonists can induce dopamine dysregulation (Jentsch
and Roth, 1999). Because the typical and atypical neuro-
leptics interfere with dopaminergic and serotonergic
neurotransmission, respectively, abnormalities in these
transmitter systems are thought to play a central role
in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Whether these
systems play a role in modulating neural synchrony has
not been investigated yet.
There is preliminary evidence, however, indicating a
relationship between dopaminergic neurotransmission
Figure 1. Neural Synchrony during Gestalt Perception in Schizo-
phrenia
Group average of phase synchrony for all electrodes and for correct
trials during a Gestalt perception task in controls (A and B). Phase-
synchrony values are displayed in standard deviations (SD) in refer-
ence to the baseline. Phase synchrony during Gestalt perception in
controls exhibited two maxima over an average frequency range of
20–30 Hz (A). The increase in phase synchrony between 200–300 ms
has been related to the construction of coherent object representa-
tions (Rodriguez et al., 1999), whereas the second peak indexes the
preparation and execution of the motor response. In patients with
schizophrenia (B), the onset of the ﬁrst peak in the face condition
was delayed and occurred between 350–400 ms in the frequency
range of 20–25 Hz (C). In addition, a second, weaker peak was found
around 600 ms. Compared with controls, the reduction in phase syn-
chrony in the frequency range of 20–30 Hz was signiﬁcant [frequency
range: 20–30 Hz, time interval: 200–280 ms, t(36) = 2.96, p = 0.005].
(C) shows the topography of phase synchrony between 20–30 Hz.
Synchrony between electrodes is indicated by lines, which are
drawn only if the synchrony value is beyond a two-tailed probability
of p < 0.0005. Differences between groups are displayed in the bot-
tom row. Black lines indicate a decrease in synchrony in schizophre-
nia patients compared with controls. Green lines indicate increase
in synchrony for patients with schizophrenia relative to controls.
The decrease in phase synchrony between 200–300 ms indexes a
deﬁcit in the long-range synchronization during Gestalt perception
in schizophrenia. Adapted from Uhlhaas et al., 2006, copyright
2006 by the Society for Neuroscience.
Neuron
158

and neural synchrony. For example, studies that have
examined the relationship between dopamine-mediated
neurotransmission in PD and neural synchrony show
that dopamine agonists decrease pathological b-oscil-
lations in the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and increase
g-band oscillations in cortical and subcortical networks
(Brown et al., 2001; Sharott et al., 2005). Moreover,
dopaminergic dysfunctions could affect neural synchro-
nization in schizophrenia via dopaminergic action on
GABAergic interneurons (Seamans and Yang, 2004).
So far, direct evidence for a link between neural syn-
chrony and neurotransmitter systems is available only
for the cholinergic system (Rodriguez et al., 2004). Cor-
tical networks can only engage in synchronized, high-
frequency oscillations when muscarinic receptors are
activated. Further studies need to clarify whether this
ﬁnding can be related to the emerging evidence that
deﬁcits in cholinergic transmission may be involved in
abnormal cortical information processing in schizophre-
nia (Sarter et al., 2005).
In summary, there is consistent evidence that neural
synchrony is impaired in patients with schizophrenia.
This impairment is particularly pronounced for oscilla-
tory activity in the b- and g-frequency ranges and for
the synchronization of these high-frequency oscillations
over longer distances. Because synchronization of
oscillatory activity in this frequency range is associated
with cognitive functions that are disturbed in schizo-
phrenia patients, it is conceivable that the relation be-
tween impaired synchrony and the symptomatology
of schizophrenia is not merely correlative. Data on ana-
tomical connectivity and neurotransmitter systems in
schizophrenia suggest several potential causes for im-
paired neural synchrony, but more focused studies are
required to distinguish between cause and effect.
Neural Synchrony in Epilepsy
Epilepsy designates a group of heterogeneous disor-
ders of the nervous system that differ with respect to
etiology and symptomatology. Traditionally, epilepsy
has been assumed to result from abnormal, typically
too high and too extended, neural synchronization. Pen-
ﬁeld et al. (1954), for example, suggested that the high
voltages recorded from epileptic cortex reﬂect hyper-
synchronous neural activity.
Etiologically, a wide range of factors can induce ab-
normal synchronization. These range from structural
damage (encephalitis, craniocerebral trauma and tu-
mors) to abnormal metabolic states (fever, sleep depri-
vation, alkalosis, etc.). Genetic predisposition also plays
a role in epileptogenesis. Depending on etiology and
disposition, seizures can be conﬁned to restricted re-
gions of the cortex (focal epilepsy). This leads to speciﬁc
cognitive or motor symptoms, such as hallucinations, in
the case of complex partial seizures within sensory
areas, or myoclonia, if the focus is in motor areas. In
contrast, in convulsive seizure disorders (grand-mal
epilepsia), abnormal synchronization tends to spread
over the whole neocortex, involving also subcortical
structures, and leads to comatose states. In absence
seizures,
characteristic,
highly
synchronized
low-
frequency oscillations generated by thalamo-cortico-
thalamic loops cause a breakdown of all higher cogni-
tive functions (Niedermeyer, 2005). Together with the
evidence that synchronization of neural responses plays
an important role in signal transduction and information
processing (see Introduction), these well-established
correlations between abnormal synchronization and
the breakdown of neuronal functions are strong support
for the hypothesis that temporal patterning of neural ac-
tivity and a precisely regulated trade-off between corre-
lated and decorrelated activation patterns are crucial for
normal brain functions.
One of the hallmarks of epileptiform activity is abnor-
mally high synchrony in extensive brain regions as re-
ﬂected by large-amplitude ﬂuctuations in the EEG both
during and between seizures (Niedermeyer, 2005; Ster-
iade, 2003). For example, during absence seizures, the
sudden arrest of ongoing behavior and the impairment
of consciousness are accompanied by the abrupt occur-
rence of synchronous, low-frequency, three-per-second
spike-and-wave discharges (SWDs) in the EEG over
a wide range of cortical areas. Meeren et al. (2002)
showed in a genetic animal model of absence epilepsy
that SWDs originate in the cortex and initiate oscillations
in the thalamo-cortical-thalamic loop. These results are
consistent with ﬁndings that cortical-spike wave sei-
zures can still be recorded after ipsilateral thalamec-
tomy (Steriade and Contreras, 1998), thus making it
unlikely that seizure generation depends only on tha-
lamic mechanisms.
Epilepsy is typically associated with a number of char-
acteristic cognitive and behavioral phenomena. Com-
plex partial seizures are frequently accompanied by
auras that involve hallucinations in different modalities,
unusual sensations, de´ ja` vu experiences, emotional
feelings, and recall of old memories (Medvedev, 2002).
After partial complex, generalized tonic-clonic, and cer-
tain other types of seizures, loss of short-term memories
and retrograde amnesia has been reported. Depending
on the involved cortical regions, speciﬁc cognitive dys-
functions are observed. Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE)
is typically associated with memory impairment, while
focal epilepsy over the language-dominant hemisphere
can cause word ﬁnding and naming difﬁculties (Mota-
medi and Meador, 2003). These correlations suggest
that abnormal temporal patterning of neural activity
disrupts cognitive processes.
High-frequency oscillatory activity, especially in the g-
band, has been frequently observed in the EEG before
and during epileptic events (for a review see Rampp
and Stefan, 2006). Allen et al. (1992) and Fisher et al.
(1992) reported activity in the g-band before and at the
onset of seizures. High-frequency oscillations (100–500
Hz) were also found in intracerebral recordings in pa-
tients with focal epilepsy near the time of the onset of
the seizure (Jirsch et al., 2006). The presence of high-
frequency oscillatory activity prior to the onset of ictal
activity has also been observed in rodent models of
epilepsy (Bragin et al., 1999).
Several studies examined phase synchrony during
interictal, ictal, and preictal activity and have provided
further insights into the role of neural synchrony in the
generation of seizure activity. These studies challenged
the notion that neural synchrony is generally increased
in epilepsy. Evidence from hippocampal slices shows
that bursts in CA1 pyramidal neurons are caused by
neuronal
activity
that
is
synchronized
with
high
Review
159

precision (<10 ms) in the b-band; however, during sei-
zures, neuronal activity is no longer synchronous (Netoff
and Schiff, 2002). Garcia Dominguez et al. (2005) ana-
lyzed MEG data from epileptic patients with generalized
seizures in order to determine the extent of phase syn-
chronization within and across distant cortical areas.
The results revealed increased local synchrony in the
b- and lower g-band, whereas synchrony was normal,
or even reduced, between distant regions. This is in
agreement with the study by van Putten (2003), which
showed that only enhanced local phase synchronization
is a signiﬁcant correlate of seizure activity.
Analyzing phase synchrony during preictal EEG activ-
ity has also challenged the notion that neural synchrony
is generally increased. Le Van Quyen et al. (2003) exam-
ined phase synchrony with intracranial recordings from
eight patients exhibiting neocortical focal epilepsy. In
77% of the seizures, there was a preictal decrease in
synchrony in the b-band. This reduction of synchrony
between different electrode sites sometimes occurred
before the actual seizure and was characterized by re-
current spatial patterns that were close to the actual
sites of the epileptogenic focus. This suggests that pre-
ictal desynchronization may facilitate seizure activity
through isolating the pathologically discharging neu-
rons of the epileptic focus from the controlling inﬂuence
of the embedding network. It is thus conceivable that re-
duction of coherence and the associated reduction in
coupling allows the focus to engage in supracritical syn-
chronous activity, which then spreads into the surround-
ing networks.
Data from functional and anatomical imaging studies
support this view. Waites et al. (2006) showed that dur-
ing resting state, patients with TLE exhibit reduced func-
tional connectivity between the brain areas involved in
language generation. Likewise, in a recent DTI study,
Dumas de la Roque et al. (2005) reported that patients
with intractable partial epilepsy had reduced connectiv-
ity between cortical areas surrounding the electric
focus, as well as reduced connectivity between more
distant cortical areas.
Experimental and clinical data suggest that convul-
sive epilepsy is often associated with an imbalance
between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitter sys-
tems, causing enhanced excitability. GABAergic inter-
neurons play a critical role in maintaining this balance
(Levitt, 2005) and accordingly, convulsive seizures can
be suppressed or reduced by enhancing GABAergic
transmission (Snead, 1992). However, in vitro data indi-
cate that seizure activity can be precipitated by the ad-
ministration of GABAergic drugs (von Krosigk et al.,
1993). In animal models of absence seizures, GABA(B)
receptor agonists increase spiking activity, whereas
blocking of GABA(B) receptors reduces the number of
spiking episodes (Marrosu et al., 2006). These heteroge-
neous effects of GABAergic drugs have to do with the
multiple functional roles of inhibitory interneurons. On
the one hand, their activity reduces network excitability;
on the other hand, they contribute essentially to the
oscillatory patterning and synchronization of neural
activity (see above). As synchronization increases the
impact of neural activity in target structures, enhanced
GABAergic transmission may, in certain cases, facilitate
seizures by inducing synchronous population dis-
charges that then spread very effectively across neigh-
boring networks. In the case of absence seizures,
GABA-mediated hyperpolarization is essential for the
development of the synchronized, low-frequency oscil-
lations because these depend on low-threshold Ca2+
channels that are only activatible when the membrane
potential drops substantially below the average resting
level (e.g., McCormick and Williamson, 1989; Huguenard
and Prince, 1994; Ulrich and Huguenard, 1996). How-
ever, there is also evidence that abnormalities in
GABAergic transmission alone may not be sufﬁcient
for epileptogenesis in mature cortex and that seizure
activity is likely to depend, in addition, upon synergistic
alterations
of
glutamatergic
transmission
involving
NMDA-receptors (Khalilov et al., 2005).
Furthermore, gap junctions have been proposed to
play an important role in the synchronization and prop-
agation of epileptic activity (Carlen et al., 2000; Traub
et al., 2001). In vitro data show that the generation of
the high-frequency oscillations associated with preictal
EEG activity is facilitated by direct electrotonic coupling
of neurons via gap junctions (Draguhn et al., 1998). Ac-
cordingly, gap junction blockers have been shown to
be effective in suppressing seizures in rat models of
focal cortical epilepsy (Nilsen et al., 2006), in modifying
the expression of rhythmical discharges, and in control-
ling the duration and propagation of individual seizures
in vivo (Gajda et al., 2003).
In conclusion, seizures are not only a consequence of
heightened neuronal excitability such as results from an
imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory mecha-
nisms. Alterations of the mechanisms that support the
oscillatory patterning and the synchronization of neuro-
nal activity appear to be equally important. As synchro-
nization enhances the coupling among distributed neu-
ronal populations (Abeles, 1991; Bruno and Sakmann,
2006; Fries, 2005), reduced synchrony could contribute
to the functional isolation of foci, allowing them to
develop supracritical excitatory states, while synchroni-
zation could facilitate maintenance of supracritical
excitatory activity in re-entrant loops and the spread of
seizure activity. Both the reduced synchronization pre-
ceding some forms of epileptic activity and the en-
hanced synchronization associated with seizures proper
go along with the disturbance of cognitive functions,
supporting the notion that normal brain functions re-
quire not only appropriate adjustment of neuronal excit-
ability, but also a subtle balance of synchrony.
Neural Synchrony in Autism
Autism is a developmental brain disorder characterized
by a triad of impairments that affect social interaction,
verbal and nonverbal communication, and the repertoire
of interests and activities (APA, 2000). Similar to recent
work in schizophrenia (Uhlhaas and Silverstein, 2005;
Phillips and Silverstein, 2003), theories that account for
the pervasive cognitive dysfunctions associated with
autism have highlighted a deﬁcit in the integration of
cognitive mechanisms (Frith and Happe, 1994; Hill and
Frith, 2003). A number of studies have demonstrated
superior performance in tasks requiring recognition
of details and directing attention to small elements as,
for example, in visual search and in the identiﬁcation
of hidden ﬁgures. This reduced ability to integrate
Neuron
160

components into coherent representations is not con-
ﬁned to visual perception, but has also been found in
the processing of auditory information, linguistic con-
text, and social cues (for a review, see Happe and Frith,
2006).
Current theories and experimental data (Belmonte
et al., 2004; Brock et al., 2002; Hill and Frith, 2003; Just
et al., 2004; Polleux and Lauder, 2004) converge on the
notion that dysfunctional integrative mechanisms in au-
tism may be the result of reduced neural synchroniza-
tion. Recent fMRI and EEG studies have supported
this view. Just et al. (2004) examined functional connec-
tivity by measuring the covariances of BOLD signals
during sentence comprehension in high-functioning
individuals with autism. The study showed systematic
differences between groups with respect to the distribu-
tion of brain activation and functional connectivity.
Compared to controls, subjects with autism were char-
acterized by a marked reduction in functional connectiv-
ity throughout the cortical language system that was
most pronounced during comprehension of sentences.
In addition, individuals with autism showed reduced ac-
tivation in the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG; also known
as Broca’s Areas), but enhanced activation in the left
posterior superior temporal gyrus (LSTG) compared
with the control group. This suggests that autistic sub-
jects engaged more in extensive processing of the
meaning of the individual words, as reﬂected in the ac-
tivity in the LSTG, but reduced processing of syntactic
and conceptual information.
A number of additional fMRI studies have supported
the concept of reduced functional connectivity in
autism. In a second study, Just et al. (2006) reported re-
duced functional connectivity between frontal and pari-
etal areas during an executive task. Furthermore, there
is evidence for reduced volume of the corpus callosum.
fMRI studies of social cognition (Castelli et al., 2002),
working memory (Koshino et al., 2005), and visuo-motor
coordination (Villalobos et al., 2005) have further sup-
ported the notion that reduced functional connectivity
may underlie a wide range of cognitive deﬁcits in autism.
In analogy to the ﬁndings in schizophrenia patients,
these data predict that autism should be associated
with reduced neural synchrony. However, so far only
a few studies have examined this possibility. Grice
et al. (2001) analyzed induced g-band activity in individ-
uals with autism and in a matched control group during
the perception of face stimuli. In controls, an increase in
induced g-power differentiated responses to face from
no-face stimuli, while subjects with autism showed no
difference between the two experimental conditions.
Analysis of auditory steady-state responses indicates
that, similar to patients with schizophrenia, there is a re-
duction in the power of the stimulus-locked responses
in the g-band range in autism (Wilson et al., 2006).
Several authors have recently proposed that cortical
networks in autism may be characterized by an imbal-
ance between excitation and inhibition, which leads to
hyperexcitability and unstable cortical networks (Huss-
man, 2001; Rubenstein and Merzenich, 2003). This hy-
pothesis is consistent with abnormalities in GABAergic
and glutamatergic transmitter systems. Indications for
reduced GABAergic inhibition have been derived from
the evidence that autism is associated with mutations
of genes encoding subunits of the GABA(A) receptor, re-
duced expression of GAD 65 and GAD 67, and synthesis
of abnormal isoforms of these enzymes (DiCicco-Bloom
et al., 2006; Polleux and Lauder, 2004). Abnormal gluta-
matergic neurotransmission is supported by polymor-
phisms in genes that encode both metabotropic and
ionotropic glutamate receptors (Carlsson, 1998; Polleux
and Lauder, 2004), and a post mortem study has re-
ported reduced AMPA-receptors in the cerebellum (Pur-
cell et al., 2001). In addition, the serotonergic system
may be dysregulated in autism (Polleux and Lauder,
2004). To date, it is unclear how these abnormalities re-
late to the cognitive deﬁcits in autism, whether they play
a role in the hypothesized disruption of integrative pro-
cesses, and whether there are electrographic correlates
of reduced large-scale synchronization in this disorder.
Anatomically, there is evidence for both hyper- as well
as hypoconnectivity in autism. During early develop-
ment (between 7–11 years), white matter increases sig-
niﬁcantly more in autistic than in normal children. In
the same age group, gray matter is reduced in a number
of regions, including the hippocampus and amygdala
(Herbert et al., 2003). Evidence for a transient hypertro-
phy of white matter has also been found in previous
studies (Courchesne et al., 2001), and this ﬁnding has
later been complemented by results suggesting exag-
gerated pruning to subnormal levels, consistent with
evidence for anatomical hypoconnectivity (Just et al.,
2004; McCaffery and Deutsch, 2005). These anatomical
results also predict reduced or otherwise abnormal syn-
chrony, but more EEG and MEG studies with advanced
techniques for the identiﬁcation of synchrony are re-
quired to clarify this issue.
Neural Synchrony in Alzheimer’s Disease
AD is the most common form of dementia, affecting ap-
proximately 11% of the world population older than 65
years of age (Hof and Morrison, 1999). AD is associated
with a wide range of cognitive dysfunctions that typically
start with characteristic memory impairment, followed
by deﬁcits in visuo-spatial and executive processes.
These differential impairments in cognitive domains
reﬂect the spread of cortical pathology from medial-
temporal to parietal association areas (Braak and Braak,
1991; Pantel et al., 2004). Patients with AD show pro-
nounced deﬁcits while performing tasks that require
interhemispheric
transfer
of
information,
executive
processing, and episodic memory (for a review, see
Delbeuck et al., 2003). In contrast, in early stages of
the disease, automatic processing is intact. Delbeuck
et al. (2003) have suggested that the proﬁle of neuropsy-
chological deﬁcits is consistent with a disconnection
syndrome.
A hallmark of the resting-state EEG in patients with AD
is a relative increase in the q and D-band activity that co-
occurs with a reduction in activity in the a- and b-band.
The reduction in a-band activity correlates well with the
severity of the disease and the cognitive deﬁcits (Jeong,
2004). These power changes in distinct frequency bands
are associated with impaired synchrony. Patients with
AD show reduced coherence of oscillations in the a- and
b-frequency band both for distant and nearby recording
sites. More direct evidence comes from studies that
have utilized more sensitive measures of synchrony.
Review
161

Stam and colleagues (Stam et al., 2003, 2005, 2006) have
analyzed EEG resting data using a measure of synchro-
nization likelihood (SL) (Stam and van Dijk, 2002) that
is sensitive to linear and nonlinear interdependencies
between EEG channels. The results indicate that pa-
tients with AD show a reduction in b- as well as a-band
synchronization. Topographically, the reduction of syn-
chrony is particularly pronounced for long-range syn-
chronization (Babiloni et al., 2004; Stam et al., 2006).
In addition to lowered synchronization in the a- and
b-band, patients with AD are also characterized by a
reduction in g-band synchronization in the resting state
(Koenig et al., 2005).
Thus, there is substantial evidence for reduced neural
synchrony during the resting state, but relatively little
research has been performed so far to link reductions
in neural synchrony directly to impaired cognition by
analyzing task- and performance-related changes of
synchronization. The only task-related study is the in-
vestigation by Pijnenburg et al. (2004). The authors ex-
amined neural synchrony in patients with AD during
a working memory task. Patients with AD showed a re-
duction of a- and b-band synchronization during mainte-
nance of information in working memory compared with
control subjects.
fMRI studies support this evidence of reduced coordi-
nation of neural activity in AD. By applying a working
memory task, Grady et al. (2001) found reduced func-
tional connectivity between prefrontal cortex and hippo-
campus and suggested that this reﬂects impaired cou-
pling and may underlie the typical memory breakdown
associated with the disease. Bokde et al. (2006) exam-
ined functional connectivity during a face-matching task
in subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). Indi-
viduals with MCI have a higher risk of conversion to AD
than cognitively normal subjects. Similar to the results by
Grady and colleagues, MCI patients were characterized
by a reduction in functional connectivity involving the fu-
siform gyrus (FG), the parietal lobes, and the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Interestingly, the groups did
not differ in performance or activation. Also, the ampli-
tudes of the BOLD signal were in the normal range, indi-
cating that reduced functional connectivity might repre-
sent one of the earliest functional markers of AD.
The hypothesis that impaired neural synchrony under-
lies some of the cognitive deﬁcits in AD is compatible
with data suggesting that the degenerative processes
caused by AD lead to a neocortical disconnection syn-
drome (Delbeuck et al., 2003). Neuroﬁbrillary tangles
(NFT) and neuritic plaques (NP) are particularly promi-
nent in brain areas that give rise to long cortio-cortical
tracts (Pearson et al., 1985). Accordingly, DTI studies
(Naggara et al., 2006; Medina et al., 2006) disclosed dis-
integration of white matter ﬁber tracts. Furthermore,
neural synchrony in the high-frequency range is ex-
pected to be reduced because AD leads to a pro-
nounced degeneration of the cholinergic projections to
the cerebral cortex that originate in the basal forebrain
and have been shown to be a necessary prerequisite
for the generation of b- and g-band oscillations and re-
sponse synchronization in this frequency range (Rodri-
guez et al., 2004). The evidence that muscarinic antago-
nists, such as scopolamine, induce a pattern of memory
and cognitive deﬁcits characteristic of elderly subjects
and shift EEG power toward lower frequencies (Ebert
and Kirch, 1998) is compatible with this hypothesis.
Finally, there is evidence for alterations in glutamater-
gic neurotransmission, which may also affect neuronal
synchronization in AD. Snyder et al. (2005) demon-
strated that NPs produce a persistent depression of
NMDA-evoked currents in cortical neurons. Moreover,
neurons from a genetically modiﬁed mouse model of
AD expressed reduced amounts of NMDA-receptors.
These ﬁndings suggest that AD-related alterations of
cellular functions can cause depression of NMDA-
receptor-mediated synaptic transmission. A more direct
link between AD and impaired neural synchrony has
been reported by Stern et al. (2004). Increased expres-
sion of amyloid precursor protein in transgenic mice
produced an increased jitter in the timing of evoked ac-
tion potentials in intracellular recordings from neocorti-
cal pyramidal neurons. These ﬁnding suggest the possi-
bility that accumulation of AD-related proteins has
speciﬁc effects on neural excitability and synaptic trans-
mission that impair neural synchrony and, hence, also
the propagation and temporal coordination of activity.
Taken together, these data suggest that the cognitive
disturbances associated with AD may not solely be due
to the loss of neurons, but also due to impairments in the
temporal coordination of distributed neuronal activity.
So far, studies have concentrated on neural synchrony
in the lower frequency bands, especially in the a-band,
and more investigations are required to examine the ex-
pected deﬁcits of long-range synchrony in the higher
frequency bands.
Neural Synchrony in Parkinson’s Disease
Neural synchronization is not only relevant for cognitive
functions; it also plays a major role in the temporal pat-
terning of motor-related activity. For example, there is
evidence for enhanced synchronized b-band activity
prior to movement preparation and during visuo-motor
coordination (Murphy and Fetz, 1996; Roelfsema et al.,
1997). However, during the execution of movements
this b-band synchronization disappears and gives way
to synchronized g-band oscillations (Schoeffelen et al.,
2005). These movement-related synchronization phe-
nomena have been found in a widely distributed network
comprising premotor and parietal areas of the neocor-
tex, the cerebellum, the striatum, and subthalamic
nucleus. Because we have focused this review on rela-
tions between synchrony and cognitive functions in
selected brain disorders, we do not attempt to give
a comprehensive overview of the numerous studies
that have examined relations between oscillatory activ-
ity patterns, such as the m or Piper rhythm, and motor
processes. Instead, we review recent evidence on corre-
lations between abnormal synchronization and move-
ment disorders in PD.
This neurodegenerative disorder is due to the loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and
causes changes in the patterning of neural activity in
the basal ganglia (BG). Among the cardinal symptoms
of PD are impaired motor activity, such as akinesia (in-
ability to initiate movement and slowness of movement),
rigidity (stiffness of muscles), and tremor. Evidence indi-
cates that thepathophysiological mechanisms responsi-
ble for the akinesia and the tremor differ (Brown, 2003).
Neuron
162

Traditionally, BG dysfunctions were explained in terms
of alterations in neural ﬁring rates that underlie the spec-
trum of movement disorders (Hutchinson et al., 2004).
However, recent research has emphasized a speciﬁc re-
lation between large-scale synchronization of oscilla-
tions in the b-frequency band and akinesia (for a review,
see Boroud et al., 2005; Brown, 2003; and Schnitzler and
Gross, 2005).
Increases in b-band activity in PD have been reported
in the STN, globus pallidus externus (Gpe), and internus
(Gpi) in single-unit activity and LFPs (Boroud et al.,
2005). Moreover, noninvasive EEG and MEG recordings
have yielded complementary data on increased long-
range synchronization in the b-range between these
structures and activity over cortical motor areas. This
led to the hypothesis that enhanced synchronization in
the b-band is responsible for the associated akinesia.
This hypothesis is supported by the evidence that, in
normal subjects, initiation of movements is associated
with inhibition of b-rhythms in the STN and a burst of
g-oscillations. The duration of this b-suppression in-
creases with the complexity of the intended movement,
and the latency of b-suppression predicts the onset of
movement; the earlier the suppression, the shorter the
movement latency. In agreement with this hypothesis,
therapeutic interventions reducing the akinetic symp-
toms have all been shown to reduce the enhanced syn-
chronization in the b-band and to facilitate g-oscilla-
tions. This holds for pharmalogical treatments that
enhance endogeneous dopamine levels, for the stereo-
tactic lesioning of the STN, and for the very effective
electrical stimulation of the STN at high frequencies
(>100 Hz) (Brown et al., 2001; Sharott et al., 2005).
As expected, a direct relation exists between oscilla-
tory neuronal activity and the tremor in PD. Levy et al.
(2000) examined the discharge patterns of STN neurons
in PD patients with limb tremor who underwent func-
tional stereotactic mapping. In patients who exhibited
limb tremor during the recording session, neurons
showed oscillatory activity that was coherent with the
frequency of the tremor. Related results have been
obtained with MEG recordings that have disclosed an
extended tremor-related network exhibiting oscillatory
activity that was harmonically related to the tremor fre-
quency (Timmermann et al., 2003).
Neural Synchrony and Pathological Brain States
The evidence reviewed suggests that schizophrenia,
autism, epilepsy, AD, and PD are characterized by
changes in neural synchrony that are likely to play an im-
portant role in the pathophysiology of the disorders (see
Table 1 for a summary). There is consistent evidence
across studies that disorders in schizophrenia, autism,
and AD are associated with a reduction of neural syn-
chrony that involves both local as well as long-range
synchronization. In addition, the cognitive functions
that are impaired have all been shown to be associated
with neural synchronization, suggesting that abnormal
synchrony could be one of the causes of the cognitive
dysfunctions. The conditions in epilepsy and PD are
more complex, as in these cases enhanced synchrony
is responsible for some of the symptomatology.
The impairments of neural synchrony observed in
schizophrenia, autism, and AD are consistent with cur-
rent theories that emphasize a disconnection syndrome
as the underlying pathophysiological mechanism. Ac-
cording to these theories, cognitive dysfunctions as
well as the overt symptoms of these disorders arise
from a dysfunction in the coordination of distributed
neural activity between and within functionally special-
ized regions of the cerebral cortex. Reduced neural syn-
chronization can be a consequence of disconnection,
but it can also be the cause of impaired coupling
between brain areas because synchronization of neural
responses is essential for their propagation across
sparsely connected networks (Abeles, 1991). At present,
it is difﬁcult to differentiate between these possibilities.
In contrast, epilepsy and PD are characterized by
a large variety of abnormalities in the temporal pattern-
ing of neural activity, involving changes in the frequency
of oscillatory activity and increases as well as decreases
in synchronization. Each of these abnormalities is asso-
ciated with speciﬁc impairments of cognitive or motor
functions, supporting the notion that normal brain
Table 1. Selected Neurobiological Elements of Cognitive Dysfunction
Disorder
Neural synchrony
Cognitive dysfunctions
Anatomical connectivity
Neurotransmitters
Schizophrenia
consistent evidence for
a reduction of local- and
long-range
synchronization
perception, executive
processes, memory,
attention, social cognition
evidence for reduced
anatomical connectivity
glutamate, GABA,
dopamine
Epilepsy
increase in local synchrony;
evidence for a reduction in
long-range
synchronization
speciﬁc cognitive deﬁcits in
relationship to seizure focus
reduced connectivity
between seizure focus and
surrounding cortical areas
GABA, glutamate
Autism
reduced functional
connectivity; preliminary
evidence for impaired
neural synchrony
perception, executive
functions, social cognition,
attention, memory
increased connectivity during
early development, but
possibly hypoconnectivity
in mature cortex
GABA, glutamate,
serotonin
Alzheimer’s disease
reduced neural synchrony
during resting state;
evidence for reduced
functional connectivity
working memory, perception,
attention, executive
processes
reduction in anatomical
connectivity
acetylcholine,
glutamate
Parkinson’s disease
increase in neural synchrony
in the basal ganglia, but
also between subcortical-
cortial structures
especially motor functioning,
but also perception, working
memory, attention,
executive functions
unknown
dopamine
Review
163

functions depend to a crucial extent on the appropriate
adjustment and coordination of temporally structured
activity. This ﬁne-tuning appears to involve selection of
oscillation frequencies as well as a delicate balance be-
tween synchronization and desynchronization of inter-
acting cell assemblies.
Neural Synchrony and Pathological Brain States:
Implications for Normal Brain Functioning
A wide range of cognitive functions requires the coordi-
nation of distributed neural activity, and current theories
highlight neural synchrony as a putative mechanism
for this coordination. The ﬁndings summarized in this
review provide further support for this hypothesis by
demonstrating a correlation between abnormal syn-
chronization and speciﬁc cognitive deﬁcits in a variety
of neuropsychiatric disorders.
These data also suggest that deﬁcits of mainly large-
scale integration correlate with cognitive impairments.
In schizophrenia (Uhlhaas et al., 2006), AD (Bokde
et al., 2006; Stam et al., 2006), and autism (Just et al.,
2004), large-scale integration was found to be more
impaired than local synchronization, as reﬂected by the
amplitude of local oscillatory activity and BOLD activa-
tion. Furthermore, cognitive dysfunctions were par-
ticularly pronounced for tasks requiring interactions be-
tween widely distributed brain areas, such as integration
of polymodal stimulus attributes, dynamic perceptual
grouping, working memory, and executive processes
(Delbeuck et al., 2003; Minshew et al., 1997; Phillips
and Silverstein, 2003). This agrees with the proposals of
several authors that complex cognitive processes, such
as attention, memory, dynamic grouping, and aware-
ness require large-scale integration of activity (Fries,
2005; Schnitzler and Gross, 2005; Varela et al., 2001).
Future Perspectives of Research on Neural
Synchrony in Pathological Brain States
The data reviewed here suggest that measures of neural
synchronization may be of importance for the diagnosis
of neuropsychiatric disorders. As measurements of neu-
ronal synchrony are noninvasive and quantiﬁable in an
objective way that is largely immune to observer bias,
advanced methods of time series analysis may provide
valuable diagnostic tools for the assessment of disease
progression and efﬁciency of therapeutic interventions.
For example, analysis of phase synchronization has
been applied to the EEG data of patients with epilepsy,
and the results suggest that seizures can be predicted
based on changes in synchronization (Le Van Quyen
et al., 2003). Aberrant large-scale integration of neural
activity may also turn out to be a predictor of incipient
AD. The study by Bokde et al. (2006) showed that the
covariance of BOLD responses during a face-matching
task was a more sensitive measure for impaired brain
functioning in patients with MCI than behavioral perfor-
mance or the amplitude of regional brain activation, sug-
gesting that reduced functional connectivity might rep-
resent one of the earliest markers of changes in brain
functioning in AD. Prospective longitudinal studies of
phase synchronization with EEG, and preferably MEG,
methodology are required to examine whether changes
of synchrony in the high-frequency bands can be used
as an early predictor of AD.
Impaired neural synchrony may also guide further re-
search into the pathophysiological mechanisms under-
lying neuropsychiatric disorders. For example, there is
increasing interest in the role of GABAergic neurotrans-
mission in schizophrenia and autism. These efforts have
already led to the investigation of therapeutic effects of
GABAergic modulators in these disorders. We believe
that further research into neurotransmitter systems
and other mechanisms involved in the generation of os-
cillatory activity and its synchronization could ultimately
help develop more precise pharmacological interven-
tions for these disorders.
Besides pathological brain states such as AD, schizo-
phrenia, epilepsy, autism, and PD, neural synchrony is
also of relevance for several other disorders that have
not been reviewed here. One case is multiple sclerosis
(MS) because it is to be expected that axonal damage
and demyelination interfere with the temporal coordina-
tion of neuronal activity. In particular, long-distance syn-
chronization is likely to be impaired by prolongation of
conduction times as has been recently demonstrated
by Cover et al. (2006).
Future studies could also consider the use of mea-
sures of neural synchrony rather than just the power of
EEG or MEG signals as biofeedback signals. Evidence
indicates that biofeedback can be used to modify brain
states in neuropsychiatric disorders (Sterman and
Egner, 2006). So far, the therapeutic effects of this ap-
proach have been variable, but it is conceivable that
more advanced measures of the temporal coordination
of distributed activity will be more effective in helping the
patients bring aberrant activity under voluntary control.
Conclusion
Theoretical considerations and experimental results
suggest that synchronization of neuronal activity within
and across different brain regions is a fundamental
property of cortical and subcortical networks and serves
a variety of functions in cognitive processes (for reviews,
see Fries, 2005; Singer, 1999; and Varela et al., 2001).
The data reviewed here suggest, in addition, that neuro-
nal synchrony is altered in a number of pathological
brain states, such as schizophrenia, epilepsy, autism,
AD, and PD, and that these alterations in neural syn-
chrony may account for some of the cognitive and motor
dysfunctions associated with these diseases. Some of
the disease-related alterations of anatomical conditions
and neurotransmitter systems interfere directly with
mechanisms that support synchronization of neuronal
responses. These correlations between changes in neu-
ronal substrate, synchrony, and cognitive performance
support the hypothesis that temporal coordination of
distributed neuronal activity through precise synchroni-
zation plays an important role in normal brain functions.
Furthermore, these correlations suggest that a focused
search for abnormalities in the temporal patterning and
coordination of neuronal responses may be of potential
clinical relevance both for the diagnosis and eventually
for the treatment of those disorders as well.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Max Planck Society.
Neuron
164

References
Abeles, A. (1991). Corticonics: Neural Circuits of the Cerebral Cortex
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Allen, P.J., Fish, D.R., and Smith, S.J. (1992). Very high-frequency
rhythmic activity during SEEG suppression in frontal lobe epilepsy.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 82, 155–159.
APA (American Psychiatric Association). (2000). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision
(Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association).
Andrew, C., and Pfurtscheller, G. (1996). Event-related coherence as
a tool for studying dynamic interaction of brain regions. Electroence-
phalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 98, 144–148.
Babiloni, C., Ferri, R., Moretti, D.V., Strambi, A., Binetti, G., Dal
Forno, G., Ferreri, F., Lanuzza, B., Bonato, C., Nobili, F., et al.
(2004). Abnormal fronto-parietal coupling of brain rhythms in mild
Alzheimer’s disease: a multicentric EEG study. Eur. J. Neurosci.
19, 2583–2590.
Belmonte, M.K., Allen, G., Beckel-Mitchener, A., Boulanger, L.M.,
Carper, R.A., and Webb, S.J. (2004). Autism and abnormal develop-
ment of brain connectivity. J. Neurosci. 24, 9228–9231.
Bertrand, O., Bohorquez, J., and Pernier, J. (1994). Time-frequency
digital ﬁltering based on an invertible wavelet transform: an applica-
tion to evoked potentials. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 41, 77–88.
Bokde, A.L., Lopez-Bayo, P., Meindl, T., Pechler, S., Born, C.,
Faltraco, F., Teipel, S.J., Moller, H.J., and Hampel, H. (2006). Func-
tional connectivity of the fusiform gyrus during a face-matching
task in subjects with mild cognitive impairment. Brain 129, 1113–
1124.
Boroud, T., Brown, P., Goldberg, J.A., Graybiel, A.M., and Magill,
P.J. (2005). Oscillations in the Basa Ganglia: The good, the bad,
and the unexpected. In The Basal Ganglia VIII, J.P. Bolam, C.A.
Ingham, and P.J. Magill, eds. (New York: Springer), pp. 3–24.
Braak, H., and Braak, E. (1991). Neuropathological stageing of
Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. (Berl.) 82, 239–259.
Bragin, A., Engel, J., Jr., Wilson, C.L., Fried, I., and Mathern, G.W.
(1999). Hippocampal and entorhinal cortex high-frequency oscilla-
tions (100–500 Hz) in human epileptic brain and in kainic acid–
treated rats with chronic seizures. Epilepsia 40, 127–137.
Bressler, S.L., Coppola, R., and Nakamura, R. (1993). Episodic mul-
tiregional cortical coherence at multiple frequencies during visual
task performance. Nature 366, 153–156.
Brock, J., Brown, C.C., Boucher, J., and Rippon, G. (2002). The tem-
poral binding deﬁcit hypothesis of autism. Dev. Psychopathol. 14,
209–224.
Brown, P. (2003). The oscillatory nature of human basal ganglia ac-
tivity: relationship to the pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease.
Mov. Disord. 18, 357–363.
Brown, P., Oliviero, A., Mazzone, P., Insola, A., Tonali, P., and Di Laz-
zaro, V. (2001). Dopamine dependency of oscillations between sub-
thalamic nucleus and pallidum in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci.
21, 1033–1038.
Bruno, R.M., and Sakmann, B. (2006). Cortex is driven by weak but
synchronously
active thalamocortical
synapses.
Science 312,
1622–1627.
Carlen, P.L., Skinner, F., Zhang, L., Naus, C., Kushnir, M., and Perez
Velazquez, J.L. (2000). The role of gap junctions in seizures. Brain
Res. Brain Res. Rev. 32, 235–241.
Carlsson, M.L. (1998). Hypothesis: is infantile autism a hypoglutama-
tergic disorder? Relevance of glutamate - serotonin interactions for
pharmacotherapy. J. Neural Transm. 105, 525–535.
Castelli, F., Frith, C., Happe, F., and Frith, U. (2002). Autism, As-
perger syndrome and brain mechanisms for the attribution of mental
states to animated shapes. Brain 125, 1839–1849.
Courchesne, E., Karns, C.M., Davis, H.R., Ziccardi, R., Carper, R.A.,
Tigue, Z.D., Chisum, H.J., Moses, P., Pierce, K., Lord, C., et al. (2001).
Unusual brain growth patterns in early life in patients with autistic
disorder: an MRI study. Neurology 57, 245–254.
Cover, K.S., Vrenken, H., Geurts, J.J., van Oosten, B.W., Jelles, B.,
Polman, C.H., Stam, C.J., and van Dijk, B.W. (2006). Multiple sclero-
sis patients show a highly signiﬁcant decrease in alpha band inter-
hemispheric synchronization measured using MEG. Neuroimage
29, 783–788.
Delbeuck, X., Van der Linden, M., and Collette, F. (2003). Alzheimer’s
disease as a disconnection syndrome? Neuropsychol. Rev. 13,
79–92.
DiCicco-Bloom, E., Lord, C., Zwaigenbaum, L., Courchesne, E.,
Dager, S.R., Schmitz, C., Schultz, R.T., Crawley, J., and Young,
L.J. (2006). The developmental neurobiology of autism spectrum
disorder. J. Neurosci. 26, 6897–6906.
Dierks, T., Linden, D.E., Jandl, M., Formisano, E., Goebel, R., Lanfer-
mann, H., and Singer, W. (1999). Activation of Heschl’s gyrus during
auditory hallucinations. Neuron 22, 615–621.
Draguhn, A., Traub, R.D., Schmitz, D., and Jefferys, J.G. (1998). Elec-
trical coupling underlies high-frequency oscillations in the hippo-
campus in vitro. Nature 394, 189–192.
Dumas de la Roque, A., Oppenheim, C., Chassoux, F., Rodrigo, S.,
Beuvon, F., Daumas-Duport, C., Devaux, B., and Meder, J.F.
(2005). Diffusion tensor imaging of partial intractable epilepsy. Eur.
Radiol. 15, 279–285.
Ebert, U., and Kirch, W. (1998). Scopolamine model of dementia:
electroencephalogram ﬁndings and cognitive performance. Eur. J.
Clin. Invest. 28, 944–949.
Engel, A.K., Konig, P., Kreiter, A.K., and Singer, W. (1991). Interhemi-
spheric synchronization of oscillatory neuronal responses in cat
visual cortex. Science 252, 1177–1179.
Engel, A.K., Fries, P., and Singer, W. (2001). Dynamic predictions:
oscillations and synchrony in top-down processing. Nat. Rev. Neu-
rosci. 2, 704–716.
Fisher, R.S., Webber, W.R., Lesser, R.P., Arroyo, S., and Uematsu, S.
(1992). High-frequency EEG activity at the start of seizures. J. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 9, 441–448.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal
communication through neuronal coherence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9,
474–480.
Fries, P., Reynolds, J.H., Rorie, A.E., and Desimone, R. (2001a).
Modulation of oscillatory neuronal synchronization by selective
visual attention. Science 291, 1560–1563.
Fries, P., Neuenschwander, S., Engel, A.K., Goebel, R., and Singer,
W. (2001b). Rapid feature selective neuronal synchronization
through correlated latency shifting. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 194–200.
Friston, K.J. (1999). Schizophrenia and the disconnection hypothe-
sis. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 395, 68–79.
Friston, K.J., Frith, C.D., Liddle, P.F., and Frackowiak, R.S.J. (1993).
Functional connectivity: the principal component analysis of large
data sets. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 13, 5–14.
Frith, U., and Happe, F. (1994). Autism: beyond ‘‘theory of mind’’.
Cognition 50, 115–132.
Fukuda, T., Kosaka, T., Singer, W., and Galuske, R.A. (2006). Gap
junctions among dendrites of cortical GABAergic neurons establish
a dense and widespread intercolumnar network. J. Neurosci. 26,
3434–3443.
Gajda, Z., Gyengesi, E., Hermesz, E., Ali, K.S., and Szente, M. (2003).
Involvement of gap junctions in the manifestation and control of the
duration of seizures in rats in vivo. Epilepsia 44, 1596–1600.
Gallinat, J., Winterer, G., Herrmann, C.S., and Senkowski, D. (2004).
Reduced
oscillatory
gamma-band
responses
in
unmedicated
schizophrenic patients indicate impaired frontal network process-
ing. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115, 1863–1874.
Garcia Dominguez, L., Wennberg, R.A., Gaetz, W., Cheyne, D.,
Snead, O.C., III, and Perez Velazquez, J.L. (2005). Enhanced syn-
chrony in epileptiform activity? Local versus distant phase synchro-
nization in generalized seizures. J. Neurosci. 25, 8077–8084.
Grady, C.L., Furey, M.L., Pietrini, P., Horwitz, B., and Rapoport, S.I.
(2001). Altered brain functional connectivity and impaired short-term
memory in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 124, 739–756.
Gray, C.M., Koenig, P., Engel, A.K., and Singer, W. (1989). Oscillatory
responses in cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchroniza-
tion which reﬂects global stimulus properties. Nature 23, 334–337.
Review
165

Green, M.F. (1996). What are the functional consequences of neuro-
cognitive deﬁcits in schizophrenia? Am. J. Psychiatry 153, 321–330.
Green, M.F., Mintz, J., Salveson, D., Nuechterlein, K.H., Breitmeyer,
B., Light, G.A., and Braff, D.L. (2003). Visual masking as a probe for
abnormal gamma range activity in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry
53, 1113–1119.
Grice, S.J., Spratling, M.W., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Halit, H., Csibra, G.,
de Haan, M., and Johnson, M.H. (2001). Disordered visual process-
ing and oscillatory brain activity in autism and Williams syndrome.
Neuroreport 12, 2697–2700.
Haig, A.R., Gordon, E., De Pascalis, V., Meares, R.A., Bahramali, H.,
and Harris, A. (2000). Gamma activity in schizophrenia: evidence of
impaired network binding? Clin. Neurophysiol. 111, 1461–1468.
Happe, F., and Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account: detail-
focused cognitive style in autism spectrum disorders. J. Autism Dev.
Disord. 36, 5–25.
Herbert, M.R., Ziegler, D.A., Deutsch, C.K., O’Brien, L.M., Lange, N.,
Bakardjiev, A., Hodgson, J., Adrien, K.T., Steele, S., Makris, N., et al.
(2003). Dissociations of cerebral cortex, subcortical and cerebral
white matter volumes in autistic boys. Brain 126, 1182–1192.
Herrmann, C.S., Munk, M.H., and Engel, A.K. (2004). Cognitive func-
tions of gamma-band activity: memory match and utilization. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 8, 347–355.
Hill, E.L., and Frith, U. (2003). Understanding autism: insights from
mind and brain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 358, 281–
289.
Hof, P.R., and Morrison, J.H. (1999). The cellular basis of cortical dis-
connection in Alzheimer disease and related dementing conditions.
In Alzheimer Disease, R. Terry, R. Katzman, K.L. Bick, and S. Siso-
dia, eds. (New York: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins), pp. 197–229.
Honey,
G.D.,
Pomarol-Clotet,
E.,
Corlett,
P.R.,
Honey,
R.A.,
McKenna, P.J., Bullmore, E.T., and Fletcher, P.C. (2005). Functional
dysconnectivity in schizophrenia associated with attentional modu-
lation of motor function. Brain 128, 2597–2611.
Hormuzdi, S.G., Pais, I., LeBeau, F.E., Towers, S.K., Rozov, A., Buhl,
E.H., Whittington, M.A., and Monyer, H. (2001). Impaired electrical
signaling disrupts gamma frequency oscillations in connexion 36-
deﬁcient mice. Neuron 31, 487–495.
Hubl, D., Koenig, T., Strik, W., Federspiel, A., Kreis, R., Boesch, C.,
Maier, S.E., Schroth, G., Lovblad, K., and Dierks, T. (2004). Pathways
that make voices: white matter changes in auditory hallucinations.
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 61, 658–668.
Huguenard, J.R., and Prince, D.A. (1994). Intrathalamic rhythmicity
studied in vitro: nominal T-current modulation causes robust antio-
scillatory effects. J. Neurosci. 14, 5485–5502.
Hussman, J.P. (2001). Suppressed GABAergic inhibition as a com-
mon factor in suspected etiologies of autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord.
31, 247–248.
Hutchinson, W.D., Dostrovsky, J.O., Walters, J.R., Courtemanche,
R., Boroud, T., Goldberg, J., and Brown, P. (2004). Neuronal oscilla-
tions in the basl ganglia and movement disorders: Evidence from
whole animal and human recordings. J. Neurosci. 24, 9240–9243.
Jentsch, J.D., and Roth, R.H. (1999). The neuropsychopharmacol-
ogy of phencyclidine: from NMDA receptor hypofunction to the do-
pamine hypothesis of schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology
20, 201–225.
Jeong, J. (2004). EEG dynamics in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 115, 1490–1505.
Jirsch, J.D., Urrestarazu, E., LeVan, P., Olivier, A., Dubeau, F., and
Gotman, J. (2006). High-frequency oscillations during human focal
seizures. Brain 129, 1593–1608.
John, E.R., Prichep, L.S., Fridman, J., and Easton, P. (1988). Neuro-
metrics: computer-assisted differential diagnosis of brain dysfunc-
tions. Science 239, 162–169.
Just, M.A., Cherkassky, V.L., Keller, T.A., and Minshew, N.J. (2004).
Cortical activation and synchronization during sentence compre-
hension in high-functioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity.
Brain 127, 1811–1821.
Just, M.A., Cherkassky, V.L., Keller, T.A., Kana, R.K., and Minshew,
N.J. (2006). Functional and anatomical cortical underconnectivity in
Autism: Evidence from an fMRI study of an executive function task
and corpus callosum morphometry. Cereb. Cortex, in press.
Khalilov, I., Le Van Quyen, M., Gozlan, H., and Ben-Ari, Y. (2005).
Epileptogenic actions of GABA and fast oscillations in the develop-
ing hippocampus. Neuron 48, 787–796.
Koenig, T., Prichep, L., Dierks, T., Hubl, D., Wahlund, L.O., John,
E.R., and Jelic, V. (2005). Decreased EEG synchronization in
Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiol.
Aging 26, 165–171.
Kopell, N., Ermentrout, G.B., Whittington, M.A., and Traub, R.D.
(2000). Gamma rhythms and beta rhythms have different synchroni-
zation properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 1867–1872.
Koshino, H., Carpenter, P.A., Minshew, N.J., Cherkassky, V.L.,
Keller, T.A., and Just, M.A. (2005). Functional connectivity in an
fMRI working memory task in high-functioning autism. Neuroimage
24, 810–821.
Krishnan, G.P., Vohs, J.L., Hetrick, W.P., Carroll, C.A., Shekhar, A.,
Bockbrader, M.A., and O’Donnell, B.F. (2005). Steady state visual
evoked potential abnormalities in schizophrenia. Clin. Neurophysiol.
116, 614–624.
Krystal, J.H., Karper, L.P., Seibyl, J.P., Freeman, G.K., Delaney, R.,
Bremner, J.D., Heninger, G.R., Bowers, M.B., Jr., and Charney,
D.S. (1994). Subanesthetic effects of the noncompetitive NMDA
antagonist, ketamine, in humans. Psychotomimetic, perceptual,
cognitive, and neuroendocrine responses. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry
51, 199–214.
Kubicki, M., McCarley, R., Westin, C.F., Park, H.J., Maier, S., Kikinis,
R., Jolesz, F.A., and Shenton, M.E. (2006). A review of diffusion ten-
sor imaging studies in schizophrenia. J. Psychiatr. Res., in press.
Kwon, J.S., O’Donnell, B.F., Wallenstein, G.V., Greene, R.W.,
Hirayasu, Y., Nestor, P.G., Hasselmo, M.E., Potts, G.F., Shenton,
M.E., and McCarley, R.W. (1999). Gamma frequency-range abnor-
malities to auditory stimulation in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychi-
atry 56, 1001–1005.
Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E., Martinerie, J., and Varela, F.J. (1999).
Measuring phase synchrony in brain signals. Hum. Brain Mapp. 8,
194–208.
Le Van Quyen, M., Navarro, V., Martinerie, J., Baulac, M., and Varela,
F.J. (2003). Toward a neurodynamical understanding of ictogenesis.
Epilepsia 44 (Suppl 12), 30–43.
Lee, S.H., Wynn, J.K., Green, M.F., Kim, H., Lee, K.J., Nam, M., Park,
J.K., and Chung, Y.C. (2006). Quantitative EEG and low resolution
electromagnetic tomography (LORETA) imaging of patients with
persistent auditory hallucinations. Schizophr. Res. 83, 111–119.
Levitt, P. (2005). Disruption of interneuron development. Epilepsia
46 (Suppl 7), 22–28.
Levy, R., Hutchinson, W.D., Lozano, A.M., and Dostrovsky, J.O.
(2000). High-frequency synchronization of neuronal activity in the
subthalamic nucleus of parkinsonian patients with lim tremor.
J. Neurosci. 20, 7766–7775.
Lewis, D.A., Hashimoto, T., and Volk, D.W. (2005). Cortical inhibitory
neurons and schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 312–324.
Llinas, R.R., and Steriade, M. (2006). Bursting of thalamic neurons
and states of vigilance. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 3297–3308.
Lo¨ wel, S., and Singer, W. (1992). Selection of intrinsic horizontal con-
nections in the visual cortex by correlated neuronal activity. Science
255, 209–212.
Marrosu, F., Santoni, F., Fa, M., Puligheddu, M., Barberini, L., Gen-
ugu, F., Frau, R., Manunta, M., and Mereu, G. (2006). Beta and
gamma range EEG power-spectrum correlation with spiking dis-
charges in DBA/2J mice absence model: role of GABA receptors.
Epilepsia 47, 489–494.
McCaffery, P., and Deutsch, C.K. (2005). Macrocephaly and the con-
trol of brain growth in autistic disorders. Prog. Neurobiol. 77, 38–56.
McCormick, D.A., and Williamson, A. (1989). Convergence and
divergence of neurotransmitter action in human cerebral cortex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 8098–8102.
Medina, D., DeToledo-Morrell, L., Urresta, F., Gabrieli, J.D., Moseley,
M., Fleischman, D., Bennett, D.A., Leurgans, S., Turner, D.A., and
Stebbins, G.T. (2006). White matter changes in mild cognitive
Neuron
166

impairment and AD: A diffusion tensor imaging study. Neurobiol.
Aging 27, 663–672.
Medvedev, A.V. (2002). Epileptiform spikes desynchronize and di-
minish fast (gamma) activity of the brain. An ‘‘anti-binding’’ mecha-
nism? Brain Res. Bull. 58, 115–128.
Meeren, H.K., Pijn, J.P., Van Luijtelaar, E.L., Coenen, A.M., and
Lopes da Silva, F.H. (2002). Cortical focus drives widespread corti-
cothalamic networks during spontaneous absence seizures in rats.
J. Neurosci. 22, 1480–1495.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A.S., Olsen, R.K., Kohn, P.D., Brown, T., Egan,
M.F., Weinberger, D.R., and Berman, K.F. (2005). Regionally speciﬁc
disturbance of dorsolateral prefrontal-hippocampal functional con-
nectivity in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 62, 379–386.
Minshew, N.J., Goldstein, G., and Siegel, D.J. (1997). Neuropsycho-
logic functioning in autism: proﬁle of a complex information pro-
cessing disorder. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 3, 303–316.
Mitra, P.P., and Pesaran, B. (1999). Analysis of dynamic brain imag-
ing data. Biophys. J. 76, 691–708.
Mitzdorf, U., and Singer, W. (1979). Excitatory synaptic ensemble
properties in the visual cortex of the macaque monkey: a current
source density analysis of electrically evoked potentials. J. Comp.
Neurol. 187, 71–83.
Moghaddam, B. (2003). Bringing order to the glutamate chaos in
schizophrenia. Neuron 40, 881–884.
Motamedi, G., and Meador, K. (2003). Epilepsy and cognition. Epi-
lepsy Behav. 4 (Supp2), 25–38.
Murphy, V.N., and Fetz, E.E. (1996). Oscillatory activity in sensorimo-
tor cortex of awake monkeys: synchronization of local ﬁeld poten-
tials and relation to behavior. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 3949–3967.
Naggara, O., Oppenheim, C., Rieu, D., Raoux, N., Rodrigo, S., Dalla
Barba, G., and Meder, J.F. (2006). Diffusion tensor imaging in early
Alzheimer’s disease. Psychiatry Res. 146, 243–249.
Nase, G., Singer, W., Monyer, H., and Engel, A.K. (2003). Features of
neuronal synchrony in mouse visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 90,
1115–1123.
Netoff, T.I., and Schiff, S.J. (2002). Decreased neuronal synchroniza-
tion during experimental seizures. J. Neurosci. 22, 7297–7307.
Niedermeyer, E. (2005). Epileptic Seizure Disorders. In Electroen-
cephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, And Related
Fields, Fifth Edition, E. Niedermeyer and F. Lopes Da Silva, eds.
(Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins), pp. 505–621.
Niessing, J., Ebisch, B., Schmidt, K.E., Niessing, M., Singer, W., and
Galuske, R.A. (2005). Hemodynamic signals correlate tightly with
synchronized gamma oscillations. Science 309, 948–951.
Nilsen, K.E., Kelso, A.R., and Cock, H.R. (2006). Antiepileptic effect
of Gap-junction blockers in a rat model of refractory focal cortical
epilepsy. Epilepsia 47, 1169–1175.
Pantel, J., Schonknecht, P., Essig, M., and Schroder, J. (2004). Dis-
tribution of cerebral atrophy assessed by magnetic resonance imag-
ing reﬂects patterns of neuropsychological deﬁcits in Alzheimer’s
dementia. Neurosci. Lett. 361, 17–20.
Pearson, R.C., Esiri, M.M., Hiorns, R.W., Wilcock, G.K., and Powell,
T.P. (1985). Anatomical correlates of the distribution of the patholog-
ical changes in the neocortex in Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 82, 4531–4534.
Penﬁeld, W., Jaspers, H., and McNaughton, F. (1954). Epilepsy and
the Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain (Boston: Little Brown).
Phillips, W.A., and Silverstein, S.M. (2003). Convergence of biologi-
cal and psychological perspectives on cognitive coordination in
schizophrenia. Behav. Brain Sci. 26, 65–82.
Pijnenburg, Y.A., v d Made, Y., van Cappellen van Walsum, A.M.,
Knol, D.L., Scheltens, P., and Stam, C.J. (2004). EEG synchronization
likelihood in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease dur-
ing a working memory task. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115, 1332–1339.
Polleux, F., and Lauder, J.M. (2004). Toward a developmental neuro-
biology of autism. Ment. Retard. Dev. Disabil. Res. Rev. 10, 303–317.
Purcell, A.E., Jeon, O.H., Zimmerman, A.W., Blue, M.E., and Pevsner,
J. (2001). Postmortem brain abnormalities of the glutamate neuro-
transmitter system in autism. Neurology 57, 1618–1628.
Rampp, S., and Stefan, H. (2006). Fast activity as a surrogate marker
of epileptic network function? - A review. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
in press.
Rodriguez, E., George, N., Lachaux, J.P., Martinerie, J., Renault, B.,
and Varela, F.J. (1999). Perception’s shadow: long-distance syn-
chronisation of human brain activity. Nature 397, 430–433.
Rodriguez, R., Kallenbach, U., Singer, W., and Munk, M.H. (2004).
Short- and long-term effects of cholinergic modulation on gamma
oscillations and response synchronization in the visual cortex.
J. Neurosci. 24, 10369–10378.
Roelfsema, P.R., Engel, A.K., Konig, P., and Singer, W. (1997). Visuo-
motor integration is associated with zero time-lag synchronisation
among cortical areas. Nature 385, 157–161.
Rubenstein, J.L., and Merzenich, M.M. (2003). Model of autism: in-
creased ratio of excitation/inhibition in key neural systems. Genes
Brain Behav. 2, 255–267.
Sarter, M., Nelson, C.L., and Bruno, J.P. (2005). Cortical cholinergic
transmission and cortical information processing in schizophrenia.
Schizophr. Bull. 31, 117–138.
Schlosser, R., Gesierich, T., Kaufmann, B., Vucurevic, G., Hunsche,
S., Gawehn, J., and Stoeter, P. (2003). Altered effective connectivity
during working memory performance in schizophrenia: a study with
fMRI and structural equation modeling. Neuroimage 19, 751–763.
Schmidt, K.E., Goebel, R., Lowel, S., and Singer, W. (1997a). The per-
ceptual grouping criterion of colinearity is reﬂected by anisotropies
of connections in the primary visual cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 9, 1083–
1089.
Schmidt, K.E., Kim, D.S., Singer, W., Bonhoeffer, T., and Lowel, S.
(1997b). Functional speciﬁcity of long-range intrinsic and interhemi-
spheric connections in the visual cortex of strabismic cats. J. Neuro-
sci. 17, 5480–5492.
Schnitzler, A., and Gross, J. (2005). Normal and pathological oscilla-
tory communication in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 285–296.
Schoeffelen, J.M., Oostenveld, R., and Fries, P. (2005). Neuronal
Coherence as a mechanism of effective corticospinal interaction.
Science 308, 111–113.
Seamans, J.K., and Yang, C.R. (2004). The principal features and
mechanisms of dopamine modulation in the prefrontal cortex.
Prog. Neurobiol. 74, 1–58.
Sharott, A., Magill, P.J., Harnack, D., Kupsch, A., Meissner, W., and
Brown, P. (2005). Dopamine depletion increases the power and co-
herence of beta-oscillations in the cerebral cortex and subthalamic
nucleus of the awake rat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21, 1413–1422.
Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: A versatile code of the deﬁ-
nition of relations? Neuron 24, 49–65.
Slewa-Younan, S., Gordon, E., Harris, A.W., Haig, A.R., Brown, K.J.,
Flor-Henry, P., and Williams, L.M. (2004). Sex differences in func-
tional connectivity in ﬁrst-episode and chronic schizophrenia
patients. Am. J. Psychiatry 161, 1595–1602.
Snead, O.C., III. (1992). Evidence for GABAB-mediated mechanisms
in experimental generalized absence seizures. Eur. J. Pharmacol.
31, 343–349.
Snyder, E.M., Nong, Y., Almeida, C.G., Paul, S., Moran, T., Choi, E.Y.,
Nairn, A.C., Salter, M.W., Lombroso, P.J., Gouras, G.K., and Green-
gard, P. (2005). Regulation of NMDA receptor trafﬁcking by amyloid-
beta. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 1051–1058.
Spencer, K.M., Nestor, P.G., Niznikiewicz, M.A., Salisbury, D.F.,
Shenton, M.E., and McCarley, R.W. (2003). Abnormal neural syn-
chrony in schizophrenia. J. Neurosci. 23, 7407–7411.
Spencer, K.M., Nestor, P.G., Perlmutter, R., Niznikiewicz, M.A.,
Klump, M.C., Frumin, M., Shenton, M.E., and McCarley, R.W.
(2004). Neural synchrony indexes disordered perception and
cognition in schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 17288–
17293.
Stam, C., and van Dijk, B.W. (2002). Synchronization likelihood: an
unbiased measure of generalized synchronization in multivariate
data sets. Physica D. 163, 236–251.
Stam, C.J., van der Made, Y., Pijnenburg, Y.A., and Scheltens, P.
(2003). EEG synchronization in mild cognitive impairment and
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neurol. Scand. 108, 90–96.
Review
167

Stam, C.J., Montez, T., Jones, B.F., Rombouts, S.A., van der Made,
Y., Pijnenburg, Y.A., and Scheltens, P. (2005). Disturbed ﬂuctuations
of resting state EEG synchronization in Alzheimer’s disease. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 116, 708–715.
Stam, C.J., Jones, B.F., Nolte, G., Breakspear, M., and Scheltens, P.
(2006). Small-world networks and functional connectivity in Alz-
heimer’s disease. Cereb. Cortex, in press.
Steriade, M. (2003). Neuronal Substrates of Sleep and Epilepsy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Steriade, M. (2005). Cellular substrates of brain rhythms. In Electro-
encephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, And Re-
lated Fields, Fifth Edition, E. Niedermeyer and F. Lopes Da Silva,
eds. (Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins), pp. 505–621.
Steriade, M., and Contreras, D. (1998). Spike-wave complexes and
fast components of cortically generated seizures. I. Role of neocor-
tex and thalamus. J. Neurophysiol. 80, 1439–1455.
Steriade, M., Dossi, R.C., Pare, D., and Oakson, G. (1991). Fast oscil-
lations (20-40 Hz) in thalamocortical systems and their potentiation
by mesopontine cholinergic nuclei in the cat. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 88, 4396–4400.
Sterman, M.B., and Egner, T. (2006). Foundation and practice of
neurofeedback for the treatment of epilepsy. Appl. Psychophysiol.
Biofeedback 31, 21–35.
Stern, E.A., Bacskai, B.J., Hickey, G.A., Attenello, F.J., Lombardo,
J.A., and Hyman, B.T. (2004). Cortical synaptic integration in vivo
is disrupted by amyloid-beta plaques. J. Neurosci. 24, 4535–4540.
Symond, M.P., Harris, A.W., Gordon, E., and Williams, L.M. (2005).
‘‘Gamma synchrony’’ in ﬁrst-episode schizophrenia: a disorder of
temporal connectivity? Am. J. Psychiatry 162, 459–465.
Tallon-Baudry, C., and Bertrand, O. (1999). Oscillatory gamma activ-
ity in humans and its role in object representation. Trends Cogn. Sci.
3, 151–162.
Tass, P., Rosenblum, M.G., Weule, J., Kurths, J., Pikovsky, A., Volk-
mann, J., Schnitzler, A., and Freund, H.J. (1998). Detection of n:m
phase locking from noisy data: application to magnetoencephalog-
raphy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3291–3294.
Tiitinen, H., Sinkkonen, J., Reinikainen, K., Alho, K., Lavikainen, J.,
and Naatanen, R. (1993). Selective attention enhances the auditory
40-Hz transient response in humans. Nature 364, 59–60.
Timmermann, L., Gross, J., Dirks, M., Volkmann, J., Freund, H.J.,
and Schnitzler, A. (2003). The cerebral oscillatory network of parkin-
sonian resting tremor. Brain 126, 199–212.
Traub, R.D., Whittington, M.A., Buhl, E.H., LeBeau, F.E., Bibbig, A.,
Boyd, S., Cross, H., and Baldeweg, T. (2001). A possible role for
gap junctions in generation of very fast EEG oscillations preceding
the onset of, and perhaps initiating, seizures. Epilepsia 42, 153–170.
Traub, R.D., Bibbig, A., LeBeau, F.E.N., Buhl, E.H., and Whittington,
M.A. (2004). Cellular mechanisms of neuronal population oscillations
in the hippocampus in vitro. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 247–278.
Uhlhaas, P.J., and Silverstein, S.M. (2005). Perceptual organization
in schizophrenia spectrum disorders: empirical research and theo-
retical implications. Psychol. Bull. 131, 618–632.
Uhlhaas, P.J., Linden, D.E.J., Singer, W., Haenschel, C., Lindner, M.,
Maurer, K., and Rodriguez, E. (2006). Dysfunctional long-range coor-
dination of neural activity during Gestalt perception in schizophre-
nia. J. Neurosci. 26, 8168–8175.
Ulrich, D., and Huguenard, J.R. (1996). Gamma-aminobutyric acid
type B receptor-dependent burst-ﬁring in thalamic neurons: a dy-
namic clamp study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 13245–13249.
van Putten, M.J. (2003). Nearest neighbor phase synchronization as
a measure to detect seizure activity from scalp EEG recordings.
J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 20, 320–325.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E., and Martinerie, J. (2001). The
brainweb: phase synchronization and large-scale integration. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 2, 229–239.
Villalobos, M.E., Mizuno, A., Dahl, B.C., Kemmotsu, N., and Muller,
R.A. (2005). Reduced functional connectivity between V1 and inferior
frontal cortex associated with visuomotor performance in autism.
Neuroimage 25, 916–925.
von Krosigk, M., Bal, T., and McCormick, D.A. (1993). Cellular mech-
anisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261,
361–364.
von Stein, A., and Sarnthein, J. (2000). Different frequencies for dif-
ferent scales of cortical integration: from local gamma to long range
alpha/theta synchronization. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 38, 301–313.
Waites, A.B., Briellmann, R.S., Saling, M.M., Abbott, D.F., and Jack-
son, G.D. (2006). Functional connectivity networks are disrupted in
left temporal lobe epilepsy. Ann. Neurol. 59, 335–343.
Wang, X.J., and Buzsaki, G. (1996). Gamma oscillation by synaptic
inhibition in a hippocampal interneuronal network model. J. Neuro-
sci. 16, 6402–6413.
Wespatat, V., Tennigkeit, F., and Singer, W. (2004). Phase sensitivity
of synaptic modiﬁcations in oscillating cells of rat visual cortex.
J. Neurosci. 24, 9067–9075.
Wilson, T.W., Rojas, D.C., Reite, M.L., Teale, P.D., and Rogers, S.J.
(2006). Children and adolescents with Autism exhibit reduced MEG
steady-state gamma responses. Biol. Psychiatry, in press.
Wynn, J.K., Light, G.A., Breitmeyer, B., Nuechterlein, K.H., and
Green, M.F. (2005). Event-related gamma activity in schizophrenia
patients during a visual backward-masking task. Am. J. Psychiatry
162, 2330–2336.
Zeitler, M., Fries, P., and Gielen, S. (2006). Assessing neuronal co-
herence with single-unit, multi-unit, and local ﬁeld potentials. Neural
Comput. 18, 2256–2281.
Neuron
168
