Find more tools at
td.org
Understanding Talent Development
WHAT IS THE ATD 
CAPABILITY MODEL
The new Talent Development Capability Model, 
developed by ATD, is a framework to guide the talent 
development profession in what practitioners need to 
know and do to develop themselves, others, and their 
organizations. It is a blueprint for impact.
This future-oriented model, which can be personalized, 
sets a new standard for the field. It responds to those 
trends affecting talent development, such as digital 
transformation, data analytics, information availability, 
and partnerships between talent development and 
business.
Who Is This Model For?
•	
current talent development professionals
•	
those seeking entry into the field
•	
managers of the talent development function
•	
organizational leaders seeking to leverage talent 
development for organizational effectiveness.
How the Model Can Be Used?
The Talent Development Capability Model can 
be applied in a variety of ways by a diverse set of 
stakeholders.  
•	
Individuals can use it to explore job or career 
expansion, identify knowledge or skill gaps, or to 
prepare for certification. 
•	
Academic institutions, professional groups, and 
others involved in education can benchmark and 
align their curricula.  
•	
TD managers and leaders can use it to establish 
what roles to fill and which sets of skills are re­
quired of their staff.
DOMAINS OF PRACTICE
Talent development knowledge and skill have been 
organized into three domains of practice that are 
applicable to all roles:  Building Personal Capabilities, 
Developing Professional Capabilities, and Impacting 
Organizational Capabilities.
CAPABILITIES
What TD professionals need to know and be able to do 
has been organized into 23 capabilities within the three 
domains. Knowledge and skill statements across these 
capabilities outline the specific content required for the 
successful and effective practice of talent development. 
Individuals can self-assess against these statements to 
identify their personal knowledge and skill gaps.
Building
Personal Capability
Developing
Professional Capability
Impacting
Organizational Capability
JOB AID
