USAID.GOV 
 
USAID/COLOMBIA COUNTRY PROFILE      |       1
COLOMBIA COUNTRY PROFILE  
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) supports Colombian 
efforts to transition out of conflict towards a sustainable and inclusive peace. 
OUR WORK 
Colombia is not a typical aid recipient and USAID’s commitment stems from the instability and strife 
associated with the country’s 50-year civil conflict.  Colombia’s status as a steadily growing middle-income 
country masks severe inequities.  In reality, there are two Colombias: a dynamic and sophisticated 
Colombia in a half-dozen urban centers, such as Bogota and Medellin, and a poor, conflictive and neglected 
rural Colombia where USAID focuses its efforts. 
The transition towards peace demands that Colombia address this duality which lies at the center of the 
conflict and fuels an illicit rural economy of drug trafficking, extortion, illegal mining, and other maladies.  
The Government of Colombia (GOC) is actively working in these areas to redress the historic neglect of 
rural Colombia by increasing citizen security; expanding GOC institutions, basic public services, and 
infrastructure; increasing public and private investment; and promoting reconciliation among the conflict’s 
victims and perpetrators.  While donor contributions amount to O.6 percent of GDP, Colombia looks to 
USAID – the country’s largest bilateral donor – to strengthen its capacity to address development 
challenges.  Thus, from 2014-2018 USAID will continue to be an important partner in Colombia with four 
overall objectives: 
OBJECTIVE 1:  INCREASE PRESENCE OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS  
Strengthening the presence and performance of national and sub-national institutions in far-flung rural areas 
is essential to fill the space currently occupied by illegal armed groups and to effectively implement the 
peace agreement.  GOC institutions face challenges to consistently guarantee the democratic rights of 
citizens, administer justice impartially and transparently, invest public resources effectively and 
PHOTO BY USAID/COLOMBIA 
@USAID_Colombia 
facebook.com/USAIDColombia 

USAID.GOV 
 
USAID/COLOMBIA COUNTRY PROFILE      |       2
expeditiously, and deliver citizen-prioritized services.  USAID therefore supports Colombian efforts to 
increase institutional presence, foster a culture of respect for human rights, promote access to justice, 
increase public investment, and provide services to historically underserved and conflictive rural areas. 
One of the most basic functions of any state is to protect the rights of citizens and ensure access to justice. 
In Colombia’s recent past, human rights violations (e.g., massacres, assassinations, kidnappings, threats) have 
occurred with some significance, especially in rural areas.  While Colombia has improved human rights 
trends over the past 10 years, there is still more to be done. For this reason, USAID coordinates closely 
with GOC institutions to prevent human rights violations, protect those under threat, investigate when 
abuses occur, strengthen the ability of citizens to submit complaints, and defend the rights of minority 
groups.  In addition, USAID supports GOC initiatives that expand access to justice by promoting alternative 
dispute resolution mechanisms and justice houses, as well as legal and other services for sexual violence 
victims. 
Expanding government services to reach citizens, especially marginalized populations in historically 
neglected areas, is a major challenge.  To this end, USAID supports efforts to restructure public investment 
toward traditionally marginalized areas.  USAID has worked with Colombian officials to develop policies 
and programs that build state presence in areas recently stabilized by Colombia’s security forces.  For 
example, USAID is supporting the GOC to implement a multi-billion dollar royalties system that re-directs 
revenue generated by income from the country’s natural resource wealth to underserved areas.  USAID is 
also supporting greater collaboration between national, departmental and municipal governments to 
catalyze significant resources for strategic investments in conflictive areas.  In carrying this out, USAID 
brings together local civil society organizations, traditional authorities, public officials and the private sector 
to strengthen local governments’ capacity to provide citizen-prioritized services.  Moreover, USAID 
increases transparency and reduces corruption by supporting national and local authorities, as well as civil 
society organizations. 
OBJECTIVE 2: PROMOTE RECONCILIATION FOR VULNERABLE POPULATIONS   
Fifty years of conflict and violence have created a tragic legacy of nearly eight million victims, including over 
six million Colombians displaced from their communities and land.  A critical step towards reconciliation 
was achieved in 2011 with the passage of Colombia’s Victims and Land Restitution Law.  This landmark 
legislation addresses the needs of conflict victims through comprehensive reparations, land restitution, 
truth-telling, and psychosocial support.  USAID supports this transformative process by building the 
capacity of the GOC’s Victims Unit as well as of other key entities charged with delivering services, 
reparations, and transitional justice to victims, as mandated by Colombian law.  USAID also supports civil 
society organizations that protect victims’ rights. 
USAID is advancing reconciliation in Colombia by changing citizens’ perceptions and attitudes affected by 
the internal armed conflict. USAID supports reconciliation efforts through a variety of strategies including 
truth-telling; strengthening citizens’ awareness about truth and reconciliation; and, building public-private 
partnerships to advance reconciliation.  As an example, truth-telling offers victims a sense of closure and 
raises societal awareness of the pain of the conflict, helping ensure that history doesn't repeat itself.  USAID 
is supporting the Center of Historical Memory to document the impacts of the conflict and strengthen 
society’s commitment to ensuring Colombia does not return to a state of violence. 
Ethnic communities represent up to one quarter of Colombia’s population and have disproportionately 
suffered from the conflict.  USAID partners with the GOC, civil society, and the private sector to 
strengthen the socio-economic inclusion of ethnic communities. USAID strengthens institutions and civil 
society, enhances economic opportunities, raises awareness of the importance of ethnic diversity, and 
strengthens governance capacity for ethnic communities. Assistance has resulted in 11,154 persons gaining 

USAID.GOV 
 
USAID/COLOMBIA COUNTRY PROFILE      |       3
formal jobs in over 1,500 private sector companies; the formalization of more than 250,000 hectares of 
collective lands; a 19 percent increase in estimated income of Afro-Colombian and indigenous families in 
priority areas; and the leveraging of $17.4 million through public-private alliances. 
To break down barriers that hinder access to education and job opportunities, USAID supports English-
language and leadership training as well as graduate education opportunities for emerging Afro-Colombian 
and Indigenous leaders. Through USAID support, 35 leaders have conducted their graduate studies in high-
ranking US universities while 125 undergraduate students have benefited from English language and 
leadership training in Barranquilla, Cali, Cartagena, Medellin and Quibdó. 
USAID also promotes the reintegration of ex-combatants back into society, as well as the rehabilitation of 
former child soldiers.  Since 2006, USAID has supported the Colombian Agency for Reintegration (ACR) in 
the successful reintegration of demobilized or deserted ex-combatants from illegal armed groups. This 
includes provision of psychosocial services, formal education, vocational training, income generation 
assistance, and health care support. With USAID assistance, more than 15,000 ex-combatants have 
successfully completed the reintegration process. 
USAID also supports the Colombian institutions in responding to the basic needs (health, education, 
security, stable family environment) of disengaged child soldiers while strengthening the GOC’s prevention 
of recruitment activities and campaigns.  Since 2001, USAID’s assistance has helped the Colombian 
government attend to almost 6,000 disengaged children and has reached almost 250,000 at-risk children in 
recruitment prevention activities.  In addition, a USAID-supported prevention strategy was recently rolled 
out in 30 municipalities classified as high risk by the GOC, and USAID continues preventing recruitment by 
increasing economic and education opportunities as well as monitoring at risk children and youth. 
In addition, USAID supports women’s efforts to prevent gender-based violence while incorporating a 
gender approach throughout its programming. USAID also supports the inclusion of people with disabilities 
through sports, training, employment opportunities, and rehabilitation centers. 
OBJECTIVE 3: IMPROVE CONDITIONS FOR INCLUSIVE RURAL ECONOMIC GROWTH 
Effectively transitioning towards a sustainable and inclusive peace requires that Colombia address long 
standing socio-economic inequities while improving the licit rural economy.  Although Colombia’s GDP per 
capita grew by 29 percent between 2010 and 2015, rural areas, especially those devastated by conflict, have 
not fully shared in this prosperity.  And although the percentage of rural citizens living below the poverty 
line (US $1.90/day) decreased by 19 percent over this same period, in 2015 roughly 40 percent of rural 
Colombians still lived in extreme poverty. 
Improving livelihoods by encouraging a diversified rural economy is a long-term and challenging endeavor, 
one that will take at least a generation and extraordinary GOC and private sector commitment.  Over the 
next five years, USAID is committed to helping the GOC create the preconditions for a vibrant rural 
economy with actions in four broad areas. 
First, USAID is spurring greater public and private investment in the rural sector.  For example, USAID is 
strengthening the capacity of local governments and community groups to advocate for and manage 
Colombian public funds for productive infrastructure projects, including roads. Through public-private 
partnerships that connect private firms with small producers and ethnic communities, USAID assists the 
rural population to access higher paying markets for local products. 
Second, USAID is ensuring that producer associations, a lynchpin of the rural economy, are better able to 
provide services and benefits to their members (e.g., smallholder farmers).  For example, USAID supports 

USAID.GOV 
 
USAID/COLOMBIA COUNTRY PROFILE      |       4
producer associations in the coffee, cacao and rubber sectors by helping them find markets and negotiate 
with large buyers.  As these producer associations grow, they are also increasingly able to provide 
extension services to members, helping farmers escape poverty and the trap of illicit crop 
production.  USAID efforts build the capacity and sustainability of such associations. 
Third, USAID increases financial inclusion in Colombia’s rural economy. By improving rural financial 
services, USAID is promoting the inclusion of those that have historically been excluded from accessing 
financial resources, a precondition for making productivity-enhancing investments. In addition, USAID has 
helped establish several investment funds that are focused on financing high-potential firms in Colombia’s 
rural economic sector. Financial inclusion is also being promoted through the Development Credit 
Authority (DCA) mechanism, by which USAID is incentivizing financial institutions to expand their 
operations into rural, conflict-affected.  
Finally, USAID is working through key GOC institutions to return land to its rightful owners and speed the 
granting of land titles, including collective titles of indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities.  USAID’s 
assistance is helping to modernize the cadaster system, permitting the GOC to maintain accurate land 
ownership and titling information, a prerequisite to guaranteeing citizen’s property rights.  
OBJECTIVE 4: STRENGTHEN ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCY AND LOW-EMISSIONS 
DEVELOPMENT 
Sustainable environmental management is critical to protecting Colombia’s economic future.  Colombia is 
one of the most biodiverse countries in the world, and its natural systems provide water and energy that 
contribute to economic productivity.  For example, 30 percent of Colombia’s water comes from the 
country’s fragile paramo ecosystem.  In addition, approximately 40 percent of Colombia’s territory is 
covered with natural forest, giving the country tremendous capacity to store carbon and capture significant 
development investment from the nascent carbon market.  USAID activities focus on improving natural 
resource management, including forest and watershed management, to reduce threats to biodiversity.  
USAID efforts strengthen the capacity of GOC institutions to protect biodiversity, foster stakeholder 
participation in community-based conservation, and introduce best environmental practices, especially for 
mining and fisheries, among other productive systems. 
The failure of the Colombian state to control vast swaths of resource-rich Amazonian forest, inter-Andean 
valleys, and Pacific lowlands has been a driver of conflict.  Without the state engaged in sound 
environmental management, illegal armed groups are able to exert control in these areas, the majority of 
which are located in Afro-Colombian and indigenous territories.  Improved GOC capacity to administer 
these biodiverse areas will reduce their use for illicit purposes (e.g. illegal gold mining).  
Colombia’s economic future also hinges on reducing vulnerability to changing climate patterns.  The 2010-
2011 flooding in the Magdalena watershed displaced approximately two million people and caused $2.6 
billion in damage. 
USAID assists Colombia to reduce poverty while protecting the environment.  For example, USAID 
supports GOC efforts to create incentives for firms and public sector entities to reduce their overall level 
of carbon emissions, while contributing to improved local livelihoods.  USAID also builds resilience to 
anticipated climate impacts by diversifying local economies and improving water management. 
