The USDA Food Supply Chain 
Guaranteed Loan Program Guide
Call Jason at 1-833-583-2648 
to get started on your project!
•	 Up to $40 million per borrower 
•	 Rural and Urban locations eligible 
•	 Fixed-interest rate option available 
•	 Up to 40-year loan terms 
•	 No USDA initial guarantee or annual renewal fees 
•	 Refinancing limited to less than 50% of total loan 
amount
THE BENEFITS: 
The Food Supply Chain Guaranteed Loan Program, launched in 
December 2021, provides financial support to businesses wanting to 
expand middle of the food supply chain activities such as aggregation, 
processing, manufacturing, storage, transportation, wholesale, or 
distribution of food.
40-year term 
loans available
No USDA-
guaranteed fees
Fixed 
interest rate
•	 Land & Buildings – convert, enlarge, repair, modernize or 
develop
•	 Machinery & Equipment – purchase and installation 
•	 Leased Facilities - building or equipping facilities for 
lease to public or private enterprises
•	 Working Capital – increase operating liquidity
EXAMPLES OF USES:
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What are the advantages of using a USDA guaranteed loan? What makes it different from other loans?
Lenders that receive a federal loan guarantee typically are able to offer more competitive interest rates and terms. From a 
borrower’s perspective, closing and making payments on a guaranteed loan is unlikely to feel different from any other loan. 
Are there geographic eligibility restrictions?
No: projects can be located in rural or urban areas
What are the equity/capital and collateral requirements?
•	
Existing business needs either a minimum of 10% balance sheet equity or 10% or more borrower investment as a 
percent of total eligible project cost. New businesses needs 20–25% balance sheet equity or borrower investment as a 
percent of total eligible project cost , depending on construction financing requirements.
•	
Discounted collateral value must at least equal proposed loan amount. 
•	
Unsecured guarantees for the full term of the guaranteed loan and at least equal to the guarantor’s percent interest 
or membership in the borrower times the guaranteed loan amount are required from any person or entity owning a 
20-opercent or greater interest in the borrower.  
Learn more about this new 
program by visiting 
MyLSB.com/usda-loan-program
Member 
FDIC
Jason Walters
Accepting applications through July 2022
