Your source for the latest research news
Date:
Source:
Summary:
Using chemistry to unlock the difference between cold- and hot-
brew coffee
April 2, 2020
American Chemical Society
Cold brew may be the hottest trend in coffee-making, but not much is known about how this process
alters the chemical characteristics of the beverage. Now, scientists report that the content of
potentially health-promoting antioxidants in coffee brewed without heat can differ significantly from a
cup of joe prepared the traditional way, particularly for dark roasts.
FULL STORY
Cold brew may be the hottest trend in coffee-making, but not a lot is known about how
this process alters the drink's chemical characteristics. Scientists now report that the
content of potentially health-promoting antioxidants in coffee brewed without heat can
significantly differ from a cup of joe prepared with the same beans in the traditional way,
particularly for dark roasts.
The researchers are presenting their results through the American Chemical Society (ACS) SciMeetings online
platform.
"This study can inform coffee enthusiasts about how they may want to craft their own coffee at home, based on
science and on analytical chemistry," says Meghan Grim, an undergraduate student who worked on the project.
"After I first tried cold-brew coffee, I wanted to make it at home, but it didn't turn out too great," says Niny Z. Rao,
Ph.D., the project's principal investigator. With her collaborator, Megan Fuller, Ph.D., Rao looked into the scientific
literature to learn what she had done wrong. "It turns out there weren't any studies on cold-brew coffee at the
time," Rao says, "so we decided to do some."
In the cold-brew process, ground coffee is mixed with room-temperature or colder water and steeped for as long
as two days, sometimes in a refrigerator. It can be drunk cold or hot. In hot brewing, ground coffee is mixed with
boiling or near-boiling water and steeped at most for a few minutes. In either case, the coffee grounds are
sometimes pressed, and the beverage is then filtered to remove the grounds.
The researchers, who are at Thomas Jefferson University, previously assessed acidity and antioxidants in hot- and
cold-brew java from lightly roasted beans. In another project, they analyzed the effect of medium and dark
roasting, and of medium and coarse grinding, on a few coffee attributes. Now they're taking a deeper dive by
roasting Columbian beans at five different temperatures -- from light roasting at 174 C to dark roasting at 209 C --
and studying the impact on acidity, antioxidants and other natural chemicals in hot- and cold-brew coffee.
With the lighter roasts, Rao's team finds that the content of caffeine and antioxidants is pretty similar in hot and
cold brews. However, significant differences show up with the darker roasts. "Hot brewing extracts more
antioxidants from the grind than cold brew, and this difference increases with the degree of roasting," Rao says. So

Cite This Page:
American Chemical Society. "Using chemistry to unlock the difference between cold- and hot-brew coffee."
ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 2 April 2020. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/04/200402134618.htm>.
hot-brew of dark roasts produces a potentially healthier drink. Hot brew also contains more of certain kinds of
acids and total dissolved solids. The pH is about the same for both hot and cold brews at equivalent roast, though
both become less acidic as roasting temperature increases.
"My advice to consumers has always been to drink what they like," Rao says. "But if you want to craft a coffee
beverage with antioxidants or acidity in mind, you may want to pay attention to roast. If you want a low-acid drink,
you may want to use a darker roast. But remember that the gap between the antioxidant content of hot- and cold-
brew coffee is much larger for a darker roast."
One of the biggest challenges in all these projects is reproducibility. "We have performed experiments in which
we're using the same beans, the same machine, the same settings, and it comes out not quite the same as the
previous batch," Rao says. "The same goes for brewing. To create a cup that's consistent every time is really
difficult. I have a lot of respect for the baristas who can do that." To approach that level of perfection, the
researchers became like drill sergeants, carefully standardizing their processes. They developed a procedure for
when the water should be added to the ground coffee, how to pour the water and for how long, how to shake the
solution, how to press the brewed coffee and how to analyze it. They set time limits for each step, with margins of
just a few seconds. This rigor produced much more reproducible results.
The team has now begun comparing the impact of the two brewing processes and degree of roast on furans,
flavor compounds present in raw coffee beans that are also generated through roasting. Such compounds are
particularly important in cold-brew joe, which doesn't have the same distinct aroma as the hot drink because it
lacks steam to carry volatile organic compounds to the nose.
Story Source:
Materials provided by American Chemical Society. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.
MLA
APA
Chicago
RELATED STORIES
How to Make the Healthiest Coffee
Apr. 22, 2020 — What's the healthiest way to make a fresh cup of coffee? A new study examining links between
coffee brewing methods and risks of heart attacks and death has concluded that filtered brew is ...
Filtered Coffee Helps Prevent Type 2 Diabetes, Show Biomarkers in Blood Samples
Dec. 19, 2019 — Coffee can help reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes -- but only filtered coffee, rather
than boiled coffee. New research show that the choice of preparation method influences the health ...
Hot Brew Coffee Has Higher Levels of Antioxidants Than Cold Brew
Nov. 1, 2018 — Comparing the properties of cold- and hot-brew coffee, researchers found similar acidity in both,
but higher antioxidant levels in hot ...
The Mathematics of Coffee Extraction: Searching for the Ideal Brew

Nov. 15, 2016 — Composed of over 1,800 chemical components, coffee is one of the most widely-consumed
drinks in the world. Understanding the mathematics of coffee extraction can help identify the influence of ...
