 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of volatile profiles of green Hawai’ian coffee beans damaged by the coffee 
berry borer (Hypothenemus hampei) 
 
 
Hannah E. Walker1, Katherine A. Lehman1, Marisa M. Wall2, Matthew S. Siderhurst1*  
 
1 Department of Chemistry, Eastern Mennonite University, 1200 Park Road, Harrisonburg, 
VA, 22802, USA 
2 Daniel K. Inouye U.S. Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center, Agricultural Research 
Service, 
United States Department of Agriculture, 64 Nowelo St., Hilo, HI 96720, USA 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process which may lead to
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi:
10.1002/jsfa.9393

 
 
 
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 
 
 
Abstract 
BACKGROUND: The coffee berry borer (CBB), Hypothenemus hampei, is the most 
destructive insect pest of coffee globally causing significant losses in yield and leading to 
off-flavors in damaged beans. Automated headspace sampling (AHS) and gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) were used to investigate changes in the 
volatile profiles of CBB damaged green coffee beans.  Green coffee from three coffee farms 
on the Island of Hawaii were sorted into three levels of CBB damage: non-damaged, slightly 
damaged (1-2 pinholes/bean), and heavily damaged (>2 pinholes/bean).   
 
RESULTS: Distinct differences were found between green coffee bean samples based on the 
amounts of eight prominent volatiles.  Increasing CBB damage was particularly correlated 
with increases in both hexanal and 2-pentylfuran.  Principle component analysis showed 
clustering of non-damaged green beans, which did not overlap with the slightly or heavily 
damaged clusters.  Good separation was also found between a mixture of 50% slightly and 
non-damaged coffee.  However, 20% slightly damaged and non-damaged coffee clusters 
showed strong overlap.   
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
CONCLUSION: Understanding the effects of CBB damage on coffee flavor profiles is critical 
to quality control for this valuable agricultural product.  The results of this study show that 
the volatile profiles of green coffee beans vary with CBB damage.   With specific volatile 
profiles for CBB damaged coffee identified, coffee samples can be tested in the lab, or 
potentially on farm or in coffee mills, to identify high levels of CBB damage that may lead to 
off-flavors and a reduction in product quality and value. 
Keywords:  Headspace sampling; green coffee; GC/MS; volatiles; principle component 
analysis 
 
Disclaimer: Mention of a trademark, warranty, proprietary product, or vendor does not 
constitute a guarantee by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and does not imply its 
approval to the exclusion of other products or vendors that may be suitable. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The coffee berry borer (CBB), Hypothenemus hampei (Ferrari) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), 
is the most destructive insect pest of coffee globally.1  Though endemic to Central Africa, 
CBB is now found in almost every coffee-producing country in the world.2,3  In 2010, CBB 
first invaded the island of Hawai’i where high quality coffee is the fourth largest cash crop, 
accounting for $50.3 million dollars in annual revenue as of 2014.4,5  A major economic 
challenge to small-scale coffee production, CBB has had the effect of making coffee farming 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
more intensive and less profitable: damage causes significant losses in yield and alters the 
flavor profile of salvageable coffee beans.2  Overall coffee production throughout Hawai’i 
has decreased by more than 20% since 2010, while overall profitability has also decreased 
significantly due in part to direct CBB coffee damage and increased costs related to CBB 
control efforts.6   
Most of the CBB life cycle occurs within coffee cherries.1,7  Female beetles bore into 
the endosperm of the cherries to lay their eggs, and larvae feed on the developing coffee 
bean.7 After larvae develop to adulthood, sibling mating occurs.2  The next generation of 
females emerges in search of new coffee cherries in which to lay eggs, while males live the 
duration of their life cycle within the cherry.  Beetles burrowing into and living in coffee 
beans cause the majority of CBB damage to coffee crops.  Coffee bean damage may range 
from small “pin holes” caused by female boring to extensive mining caused by larval 
feeding, which frequently results in secondary fungal and bacterial infestations that further 
compromise the flavor and integrity of the affected coffee.8 
CBB damage is known to cause a distinct off-flavor in coffee brewed from infested 
beans; flavors are described as “slightly bitter” or “tarry” and mask the prized floral and 
fruity notes of non-infested Kona coffee.9,10  In general, the olfactory organoleptic 
properties of coffee flavor are attributed to small volatile compounds. Therefore, the 
headspace profiles of coffee beans can provide valuable insight into their flavor and quality. 
Analysis of coffee volatiles using gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC/MS) is 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
an effective, objective method of assessing insect damage and general quality of coffee and 
other foods and beverages.11  Although the majority of volatile compounds are generated in 
the roasting process (more than 850 constituents have been identified), volatile sampling 
has also been used to evaluate green coffee beans (more than 300 constituents have been 
identified), which relates to coffee flavor and quality.12,13 
Coffee flavors result from a cocktail of various volatile compounds; around a 
thousand different compounds including acids, alcohols, aldehydes, furans, pyrazines, and 
thiols have been identified.14  Thus, volatile profiles for coffee flavors should be considered 
holistically based upon ratios of multiple key flavor components. Such data can be analyzed 
using principle component analysis (PCA) to compare, and potentially differentiate, various 
coffee samples.  
Others have used PCA in volatile assessment to categorize coffee beans based upon 
quality, damage, or regional identity. In a study by Jackels et al., GC/MS profiles were used 
with PCA to differentiate between undamaged green coffee beans and beans that had been 
damaged by another insect pest, Antestiopsis thunbergii (Gmelin) (= A. orbitalis 
(Westwood)) (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae), which is responsible for potato taste defect.15   
Similarly, Toci and Farah used solid phase microextraction (SPME) and GC to develop a 
“volatile fingerprint” for Brazilian coffees with varying degrees of damage and over a range 
of ripeness.16 Analysis of both roasted and unroasted beans identified patterns in 
concentrations of quality marker compounds that could be used to differentiate between 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
samples.16  Particularly in the specialty coffee industry, specific flavor profiles are the 
difference between a $5 and a $50 bag of coffee, making volatile analysis a potential asset 
in sorting, grading, and marketing specialty beans. Correspondingly, GC/MS analysis is a 
valuable tool for assessment of CBB damage in specialty coffees, elucidating a method by 
which damage can be monitored and quantified. 
The use of automated headspace sampling (AHS) coupled with GC/MS to analyze 
volatile organic compounds is relatively new.17  This technique has been applied to the 
analysis of volatiles from fruit,18 meat,19 and related food materials.20-22  Additionally, 
Tipler has reported on the use of this instrument to assay coffee samples.23  Advantages of 
sampling volatiles by AHS/GC/MS include improved repeatability due to greater 
automation, elimination of water before chromatographic runs, and increased ease of use 
through greater automation.   
The objective of this study was to develop an AHS/GC/MS analysis method for the 
study of volatiles in green coffee beans exhibiting various levels of visible damage by CBB.  
Using the developed method, the relative concentrations of 8 prominent volatiles were 
evaluated using PCA to determine if collected volatiles could be used as markers for CBB 
damage.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Coffee preparation 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
Green coffee beans, both undamaged and with varying degrees of CBB damage, were 
obtained from Hilo Coffee Mill, Mountain View, HI (19°33'50.8"N 155°05'17.5"W), 
Greenwell Farms, Kealakekua, HI (19°30'40.1"N 155°55'18.2"W), and Lehuula Farms, 
Kealakekua, HI (19°32'01.6"N 155°55'45.5"W).  The green coffee beans were sorted into 
three levels of infestation; undamaged, slightly damaged by CBB (1-2 pinholes/bean), and 
heavily damaged by CBB (>2 pinholes/bean).  Coffee beans with other defects, such as sour 
or black beans, were completely excluded from the analysis.   Coffee beans from the three 
infestation levels were mixed to form five treatment groups: 1) undamaged, 2) 20:80 
slightly 
damaged/undamaged 
(20% 
slightly 
damaged), 
3) 
50:50 
slightly 
damaged/undamaged (50% slightly damaged), 4) 100% slightly damaged, and 5) 100% 
heavily damaged.  Initially, 2 g samples of green coffee beans were prepared both ground 
and whole.  Ground samples were ground in a burr mill (Mr. Coffee, Cleveland, Ohio).  
Following initial analysis, GC traces with whole beans were found to be more reproducible 
and reliable, and sample preparation was easier; therefore, whole beans were used 
thereafter.  Coffee samples were sealed in 22 mL crimp vials (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) 
for analysis.  Six samples of each of the five damage levels were run for each farm (30 
samples/farm, 90 samples in total).  
 
 
Chemicals 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
All reference compounds were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO) or TCI 
America (Portland, OR).  Compound purities were >98% based on GC analysis.  Compounds 
from green coffee beans were identified based on mass spectra matching (NIST 11 Mass 
Spectral Library, Gaithersburg, MD), retention indices, and authentic standards 
comparisons.  Diagnostic ion fragments were used to assess peak areas of overlapping 
peaks. 
 
Instrumentation 
Green coffee bean volatiles were collected using a PerkinElmer TurboMatrix HS-40 AHS, 
which was interfaced via a heated transfer line (140 °C) to a PerkinElmer Clarus 680 
GC/PerkinElmer Clarus SQ 8T MS.   To optimize the AHS oven, 5 different temperatures 
were compared. The vials were equilibrated at 80°C, 120°C, 135°C, 150°C, and 190°C and 
each was held there for 15 mins. Needle and transfer line temperatures were 10°C higher 
than the equilibration temperatures in all tests, except when trying the 150°C equilibration 
temperature, with the needle and transfer line both being 130°C.   The optimal conditions 
were found to be equilibration at 120°C with both the needle and transfer line at 130°C, 
vial pressurized at 40 psi for 1 min, with the withdrawal time set at 0.2 min and desorption 
pressure set at 15 psi.  The trap was dry purged for 7 min and desorbed for 0.1 min at 260 
°C with a transfer line pressure set at 15 psi using helium as the carrier gas.  The GC was 
equipped with an HP-5MS column (30 m x 0.25 mm ID 0.25 μm film thickness).  The 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
temperature program used was 40 °C held for 2 mins, then increased to 280 °C at a rate of 
10 °C/min and held for 9 mins. The injector was run in splitless mode temperature, the 
temperature was set at 180 °C, and helium was used as the carrier gas (4.0 ml/min).  The 
MS was operated in electron ionization mode (70 eV) and it was scanning from 45 to 350 
amu.   
 
Statistical analysis   
Data were analyzed using JMP Statistical Discovery Software, version 10.0.0.24  The relative 
amount of each compound was analyzed by ANOVA followed by means comparison using 
Tukey’s HSD studentized range test. PCA was conducted to show groupings of the green 
coffee samples and the interrelationship of the collected volatile compounds.  Two analyses 
were performed, the first using the peak areas for each compound, and the second using 
the same data standardized by farm to control for location differences.  The analyses were 
performed on the correlation matrices, without rotation, using the JMP multivariate 
methods procedure.24  The resulting principal component solution scores were graphed as 
biplots.   
 
RESULTS  
Compounds in Green Coffee Samples   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
In all, 90 samples of green coffee were analyzed by headspace autosampling coupled with 
GC/MS.  Eight compounds, predominantly aldehydes, were chosen for analysis.  
Compounds were chosen based on peak prominence and consistent detection throughout 
the samples (Table 1).  Representative GC traces of headspace volatile collections from 
Greenwell Farms are shown in Figure 1A-C, respectively.  These quantified volatiles were 
subsequently used as markers for CBB damage. 
Green coffee bean samples exhibited volatile profiles that differed markedly with 
the varying levels of CBB damage investigated in this study.  All but one of the eight 
analyzed volatiles varied based on CBB damage level (Table 1).  For those that did vary, the 
relative concentrations of released volatiles increased with CBB damage with the exception 
of dimethyl sulfide (Table 1).  Increases in hexanal and 2-pentylfuran were most strongly 
correlated with increasing CBB damage across all damage levels.  Similarly, 2-
methylpropanal, 3-methylbutanal, 2-methylbutanal, and benzeneacetaldehyde increased 
with CBB damage, but in a somewhat stepwise manner: low in undamaged and slightly 
damaged beans, and high in heavily damaged beans.   Nonanal also increased in a stepwise 
manner, but the effect was less pronounced.  Dimethyl sulfide was the least stable signal for 
CBB damage, generally decreasing with CBB damage.  Undamaged, 20%, 50%, and 100% 
slightly damaged (1-2 pinholes) green coffee beans generated only 56%, 49%, 50%, and 
69% of the eight quantified volatile compounds, respectively, compared to green coffee 
heavily damaged by CBB (> 2 pinholes). 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
 
PCA of Compounds 
The initial PCA of green coffee headspace volatiles showed clustering based on the farm 
from which the coffee originated (Figure 2A).  PCA of the quantified volatiles explained 
79.3% of the variation in the data in the first two dimensions, 52.2% in the first factor and 
27.1% the second factor (Figure 2A).  The first principle component was positively 
associated with the concentrations of the aldehydes 2-methylbutanal, 2-methylpropanal, 
and 3-methylbutanal, while negatively associated with dimethyl sulfide.  The second 
component was positively associated with 2-pentylfuran, hexanal, and nonanal.  As shown 
in the biplot of the first two principal components (Figure 2A), green coffee samples 
clustered more by farm than by CBB damage.  
A second PCA, conducted on the quantified volatiles standardized by farm, showed 
that green coffee clustered based on CBB damage (Figures 2B & 3).   This PCA explained 
69.8% of the variation in the data in the first two dimensions, 41.8% in the first factor and 
28.0% the second factor (Figures 2B & 3).  The first principle component was positively 
associated with the concentrations of the aldehydes 2-methylbutanal, 2-methylpropanal, 
and 3-methylbutanal, while negatively associated with dimethyl sulfide.  The second 
component was positively associated with 2-pentylfuran and hexanal.  While many of the 
clusters based on damage overlapped (Figure 3), we were most interested to see if 
undamaged coffee could be resolved from coffee beans damaged by CBB.  Non-damaged 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
green beans clustered together and did not overlap with the slightly or heavily damaged 
clusters, in which 100% of the beans had CBB pinholes.  Good separation was also found 
between the 50% slightly CBB-damaged green coffee (1 sample of 50% overlapped into the 
non-damaged).  However, 20% slightly damaged and non-damaged coffee showed clusters 
with strong overlap (Figure 3). 
 
DISCUSSION  
Multiple studies have demonstrated an overall increase in the amounts of volatile 
substances in defective green coffee relative to non-defective coffee.25-27  Toci et al. suggest 
that elevated levels of indicator compounds are due to increased enzymatic activity in 
coffee plants in response to physiological changes, damage, or shock.27  Therefore, it is 
possible that elevated concentrations of volatile markers in CBB infested coffee are a result 
of increased enzymatic activity in the bean during development due to physiological stress 
and mechanical damage caused by insect boring, and secondary infections by molds and 
bacteria. 
Most of the compounds selected for quantification have been identified as key 
damage indicators in previous studies.  These include, dimethyl sulfide, 2-methylpropanal, 
3-methylbutanal, 2-methylbutanal, 2-pentylfuran, and hexanal, which have all been 
indicated as post-harvest quality indicators with high concentrations thought to be at least 
partially responsible for negative flavor notes in brewed coffee.28  Notably, 2-
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
methylbutanal, 3-methylbutanal, 2-pentylfuran, and hexanal have been found in elevated 
concentrations in defective beans, and they are associated with “malty,” “green bean,” and 
“grassy” aromas, respectively.16,29  Interestingly, elevated concentrations of dimethyl 
sulfide are thought to be indicative of Aspergillus molds and Penicillium bacteria, both of 
which are often spread to coffee seeds through CBB infestation.8,28  These observations 
correspond to “mold,” “mildew,” and “musty off-flavors” identified in CBB infested coffee.  
In the current study, dimethyl sulfide was a somewhat noisy signal, as the concentration of 
this volatile did not vary consistently with CBB damage.  In general, the amounts of 
dimethyl sulfide collected and analyzed decreased with CBB damage, which is at odds with 
previous reports.  
While this is the first study to look at the effects of CBB damage on the volatile 
profile of green coffee beans, numerous studies have used GC/MS to identify variations in 
key coffee volatiles as indicators of quality. For example, Toci and Farah identified potential 
markers of defective beans from Brazilian coffees that exhibited black, green, and sour 
defect.26 Similarly, Agresti et al. conducted a study that differentiated between the volatile 
fractions of immature versus black beans, and healthy versus sour beans using GC/MS and 
PCA.14 
Few studies have used this method specifically to study the effects of insect damage 
on green coffee beans. Notably, Jackels et al. used GC/MS and PCA to identify differences in 
green coffee bean volatile profiles after damaged by the variegated coffee bug (A. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
thunbergii).30  The study differentiated between samples exhibiting the “potato taste 
defect” that occurs in infested beans as a result of A. thunbergii by quantitatively tracking 
the variation in GC/MS traces. However, the study did not attempt to identify insect 
damage at varying degrees of infestation, nor did they endeavor to elucidate the potency of 
insect-related defects as they pertain to coffee flavor. 
Green coffee was chosen for this study for two reasons, 1) green beans represent the 
early stages of coffee processing and 2) using green beans allows the removal of variation 
that arises from roasting.   Analyzing volatiles from green coffee applies an assay to beans 
relatively early in the coffee production process.  If defects can be detected at an early 
stage, affected coffee might be discarded before more resources are invested in further 
processing. Additionally, green beans are often sold on the global market to companies that 
roast and blend beans.   Assessing the quality of green beans might be an important tool for 
these coffee buyers or brokers.  Furthermore, controlling variability between roasting 
batches can be difficult, and roasting beans before sorting (roasting undamaged and 
damaged beans together) would allow the possibility of cross contamination.  Analyzing 
green coffee allows the avoidance of both issues.   However, green beans are less aromatic, 
therefore producing less compounds for analysis.  Differences found between CBB-
damaged and undamaged green coffee, which are expected to produce fewer compounds, 
may be amplified if volatile analyses are repeated with roasted coffee.  This may be the case 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
in particular, because green volatiles are often precursors for the volatiles found in roasted 
coffee.31 
  
A report produced for the Hawaii Coffee Association, conducted by Greenwell 
Farms, a large Kona coffee producer and processor, found that trained cuppers 
unanimously agreed that 20% or higher CBB damage had a negative impact on roasted 
coffee flavor.32  The current study could not differentiate CBB damaged coffee at a level 
comparable to human coffee tasters.  However, this observation is reasonable given the 
differences that exist between the volatile profiles of green, roasted, and brewed coffees. 
Many studies have demonstrated that damage to green coffee beans significantly alters the 
roasting process and, thus, the volatile composition of roasted and brewed coffees as 
well.13,25,33 Furthermore, the quantity and diversity of headspace volatiles is much less in 
green coffee compared to roasted coffee. It is reasonable to speculate that the 
inconsistencies between cupping data and our statistical assessment of green coffee 
volatiles at 20% damage are result of differences between roasted and green coffee beans. 
It is possible that studies of a similar nature using roasted and/or brewed samples of CBB 
damaged coffee could identify significant differences in volatile profiles at damage 
concentrations of 20% or less. Because of the drastic chemical changes that occur in the 
volatile profile of coffee beans during roasting and brewing, such studies would more 
directly reflect the chemical variations responsible for differences in organoleptic 
properties detected by coffee cuppers and consumers. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
Understanding the effects of CBB damage of coffee flavor profiles is critical to 
quality control for this valuable agricultural product.  Without concreate measures to 
define quality parameters, the effects of CBB on coffee taste and organoleptic perception 
have been vague.  With specific volatile profiles for CBB damaged coffee identified, coffee 
samples can be tested in the lab, or potentially on farms or in mills with a portable 
electronic nose, to identify high levels of CBB damage that may lead to off-flavors and a 
reduction in product quality and value.   
 
CONCLUSION 
Our study delineated interesting trends and significant differences in the volatile 
composition of green coffee samples exhibiting varying degrees of CBB damage, and it 
elucidated an effective technique for quantifying and identifying these differences. Volatile 
profiles of green coffee beans were differentiated from undamaged samples at three levels 
of damage using GC/MS and PCA. The method was able to separate beans with very low 
levels of damage (1-2 small pinholes) from undamaged beans.  Additionally, results suggest 
that future studies should examine the volatile profiles of coffee that is roasted and brewed 
from CBB damaged samples. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
 
We would like to thank Jeanette Baysa of Hilo Coffee Mill, Tom Greenwell and Steve 
Hicks of Greenwell Farms, and Robert Nelson of Lehuula Farms for their assistance in 
procuring green coffee samples.   Additionally we would like to thank Dominick Skabeikis 
for assistance with volatile sampling and Diego Barahona for assistance with coffee sample 
preparation.  
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Damon A, A review of the biology and control of the coffee berry borer, 
Hypothenemus hampei (Coleoptera: Scolytidae). Bull Ent Res 90:453-465 (2000). 
2. 
Vega FE, Infante F, Castillo A and Jaramillo J, The coffee berry borer, Hypothenemus 
hampei (Ferrari) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae): A short review, with recent findings and 
future research directions. Terr Arthropod Rev 2:129-147 (2009). 
3. 
Infante F, Pest management strategies against the coffee berry borer (Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Scolytinae). J Agr Food Chem66:5275-5280 (2018). 
4. 
Messing RH, The Coffee Berry Borer (Hypothenemus hampei) invades Hawaii: 
Preliminary investigations on trap response and alternate hosts. Insects 3:640-652 (2012). 
5. 
Aristizábal LF, Bustillo AE and Arthurs SP, Integrated pest management of coffee 
berry borer: strategies from Latin America that could be useful for coffee farmers in 
Hawaii. Insects 7:6 (2016). 
6. 
Woodill AJ, Hemachandra D, Nakamoto ST and Leung P, The economics of coffee 
production in Hawai‘i, in Economic Issues, Ed. University of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI, pp 1-9 
(2014). 
7. 
Jaramillo J, Borgemeister C and Baker P, Coffee berry borer Hypothenemus hampei 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae): searching for sustainable control strategies. Bull Ent Res 
96:223-233 (2006). 
8. 
Velmourougane K, Bhat R and Gopinandhan TN, Coffee berry borer (Hypothenemus 
hampei)—a vector for toxigenic molds and ochratoxin A contamination in coffee beans. 
Foodborne Pathog Dis 7:1279-1284 (2010). 
9. 
International Coffee Organization, ISO 10470 - Green Coffee Defect Reference Chart, 
Ed  (2004). 
10. 
Wintgens JN, Green coffee defects guide for identification and evaluation., Ed. Nestlé 
Ltd. (1997). 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
11. 
Snow NH and Slack GC, Head-space analysis in modern gas chromatography. TRAC-
Trend Anal Chem 21:608-617 (2002). 
12. 
Flament I and Bessière-Thomas Y, Coffee flavor chemistry. John Wiley & Sons (2002). 
13. 
Lee KG and Shibamoto T, Analysis of volatile components isolated from Hawaiian 
green coffee beans (Coffea arabica L.). Flavour Fragr J 17:349-351 (2002). 
14. 
Agresti PDM, Franca AS, Oliveira LS and Augusti R, Discrimination between 
defective and non-defective Brazilian coffee beans by their volatile profile. Food Chem 
106:787-796 (2008). 
15. 
Jackels SC, Marshall EE, Omaiye AG, Gianan RL, Lee FT and Jackels CF, GCMS 
investigation of volatile compounds in green coffee affected by potato taste defect and the 
antestia bug. J Agr Food Chem 62:10222-10229 (2014). 
16. 
Toci AT and Farah A, Volatile fingerprint of Brazilian defective coffee seeds: 
Corroboration of potential marker compounds and identification of new low quality 
indicators. Food Chem 153:298-314 (2014). 
17. 
Barani F, Dell'Amico N, Griffone L, Santoro M and Tarabella C, Determination of 
volatile organic compounds by headspace trap. J Chromatogr Sci 44:625-630 (2006). 
18. 
Chen F, Su Y, Zhang F and Guo Y, Low-temperature headspace-trap gas 
chromatography with mass spectrometry for the determination of trace volatile 
compounds from the fruit of Lycium barbarum L. J Sep Sci 38:670-676 (2015). 
19. 
Bosse R, Wirth M, Konstanz A, Becker T, Weiss J and Gibis M, Determination of 
volatile marker compounds in raw ham using headspace-trap gas chromatography. Food 
Chem 219:249-259 (2017). 
20. 
Aberl A and Coelhan M, Determination of volatile compounds in different hop 
varieties by headspace-trap GC/MS-in comparison with conventional hop essential oil 
analysis. J Agr Food Chem 60:2785-2792 (2012). 
21. 
Pogačić T, Maillard MB, Leclerc A, Hervé C, Chuat V, Yee AL, Valence F and Thierry A, 
A methodological approach to screen diverse cheese-related bacteria for their ability to 
produce aroma compounds. Food Microbiol 46:145-153 (2015). 
22. 
Sghaier L, Cordella CBY, Rutledge DN, Watiez M, Breton S, Sassiat P, Thiebaut D and 
Vial J, Validation of a headspace trap gas chromatography and mass spectrometry method 
for the quantitative analysis of volatile compounds from degraded rapeseed oil. J Sep Sci 
39:1675-1683 (2016). 
23. 
Tipler A, Coffee characterization using Clarus SQ 8 GC/MS, TurboMatrix HS trap and 
GC SNFR olfactory port, Ed. PerkinElmer, Inc. , Shelton, CT (2013). 
24. 
SAS Institute, JMP Statistical Discovery Software, Ed. SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC 
(2012). 
25. 
Bandeira RD, Toci AT, Trugo LC and Farah A, Volatile composition of intrinsic 
defective coffee beans by GC/MS-headspace. Química Nova 32:309-314 (2009). 
26. 
Toci AT and Farah A, Volatile compounds as potential defective coffee beans’ 
markers. Food Chem 108:1133-1141 (2008). 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
27. 
Toci AT and Farah A, Volatile fingerprint of Brazilian defective coffee seeds: 
corroboration of potential marker compounds and identification of new low quality 
indicators. Food Chem 153:298-314 (2014). 
28. 
Toledo PR, Pezza L, Pezza HR and Toci AT, Relationship between the different 
aspects related to coffee quality and their volatile compounds. Compr Rev Food Sci F 
15:705-719 (2016). 
29. 
Yang NL, X., Degn TK, Muchow M and Fisk I, Determination of volatile marker 
compounds of common coffee roast defects. Food Chem 211:206-214 (2016). 
30. 
Jackels SC, Marshall EE, Omaiye AG, Gianan RL, Lee FT and Jackels CF, GCMS 
investigation of volatile compounds in green coffee affected by potato taste defect and the 
Antestia bug. J Agr Food Chem 62:10222-10229 (2014). 
31. 
Toledo PRAB, Pezza L, Pezza HR and Toci AT, Relationship between the different 
aspects related to coffee quality and their volatile compounds. Compr Rev Food Sci F 
15:705-719 (2016). 
32. 
Greenwell Farms, The Impact of CBB in the Flavor of Kona Coffee, Ed  (2015). 
33. 
Marin K, Požrl T, Zlatić E and Plestenjak A, A new aroma index to determine the 
aroma quality of roasted and ground coffee during storage. Food Technol Biotech 46:442-
447 (2008). 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
Figure 1. Sample traces. Eight peaks were compared among various levels of damage.  Coffee sample from Greenwell Farms.   
(A) Undamaged green coffee, (B) 100% slightly damaged (1-2 pinholes/bean) green coffee, and (C) 100% heavily damaged (>2 
pinholes/bean) green coffee.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
 
Figure 2. PCA scores biplot (PC1 vs PC2) for 90 coffee samples from three farms.  A) Green 
coffee volatiles without standardization by farm (observed sample clusterings are outlined 
by farm).  B) Green coffee volatiles standardized by farm. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
 
Figure 3. PCA scores biplot (PC1 vs PC2) for 90 coffee samples from three farms 
(standardized by farm).  Observed sample clusterings by CBB damage level are outlined.   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

 
 
 
Table 1. Average relative amounts of eight green coffee volatiles used to assess CBB damage.  
                                  Relative amount (by peak area) 
Slightly damaged 
  
Heavily damaged 
(1-2 pinholes/bean) 
(>2 pinholes/bean) 
Peak # 
Compound 
RI 
0% 
20% 
50% 
100% 
  
100% 
Ref. 
1 
Dimethyl sulfide 
649 
100 ± 20 
36 ± 10 
55 ± 13 
93 ± 21 
59 ± 13 
26 
2 
2-Methylpropanal 
665 
18 ± 2a 
15 ± 2a 
17 ± 1a 
22 ± 3a 
54 ± 11b 
26 
3 
3-Methylbutanal 
698 
23 ± 1a 
18 ± 1a 
21 ± 2a 
21 ± 2a 
60 ± 13b 
11 & 26 
4 
2-Methylbutanal 
703 
30 ± 2a 
20 ± 1a 
24 ± 2a 
29 ± 3a 
66 ± 13b 
26 
5 
Hexanal 
806 
17 ± 2a 
15 ± 2ab 
28 ± 5ab 
39 ± 7b 
61 ± 7c 
11 & 26 
6 
2-Pentylfuran 
998 
9 ± 2a 
17 ± 4a 
22 ± 5ab 37 ± 7bc 
58 ± 8c 
26 
7 
Benzeneacetaldehyde 1053 
37 ± 2a 
27 ± 2a 
34 ± 3a 
38 ± 2a 
57 ± 8b 
11 
8 
Nonanal 
1111 
14 ± 2a 
16 ± 2a 
18 ± 3ab 
27 ± 4b 
24 ± 4ab 
25 
 
RI, retention index; Ref., previously reported in green coffee.  Means followed by different letters for each compound are 
significantly different at P < 0.05; Tukey’s HSD.   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
