WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
Abstract. The dopamine molecule serves as a neurotrans‑
mitter, functioning as an amine that is formed by removing 
a carboxyl group from L‑DOPA. This essential molecule 
(C8H11NO2) is produced by neurons to transmit information to 
other neurons in both the brain. The present review discusses 
the mechanisms through which the bioactive molecules such 
as naringenin, cyanidin, uridine, luteolin, rutin, caffeine and 
morphine can enhance dopamine synthesis, modulate its 
pathways and support brain health. Dopamine deficiency is 
a major risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders, and it is 
imperative to explore the relationship between dopamine level 
and neurodegenerative disorders. Bioactive molecules provide 
promising avenues for enhancing dopamine signaling and 
preventing neurodegenerative disorders; challenges remain 
in maximizing dopamine bioavailability using bioactive 
molecules. The present review highlights the various benefits 
of bioactive molecules in enhancing dopamine synthesis, 
preventing neurodegenerative disorders, and ensuring safety 
for brain health, as well as opportunities for future research.
Contents 
1.	 Introduction
2.	 Dopamine
3.	 Bioactive compounds that enhance dopamine levels in the 
brain
4.	 Challenges and future prospects
5.	 Conclusion
1. Introduction
Natural bioactive compounds that originate from plants, 
animals, fungi and their bioactive compounds have been 
extensively examined and researched for their use as treat‑
ments for multiple conditions, such as neurological disorders, 
cardiovascular diabetes, hypertension, reproductive disorders 
and cancer (1). A number of studies have comprehensively 
covered a variety of different natural bioactive components 
utilized effectively for neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs) 
such as memory loss, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease 
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (1,2). Natural substances 
are being studied as possible neuroprotective agents for the 
treatment of NDDs (3). Since natural treatments are less costly 
and more culturally appropriate, and may aid in reducing the 
risk of developing neurodegenerative disorders at an early 
stage, millions of individuals with age‑related NDDs may 
benefit from using natural bioactive compounds instead of 
traditional pharmaceutical products. Several investigations 
using animals and cells have demonstrated the neuroprotec‑
tive benefits of a polyphenol‑rich diet (3‑5). One of the most 
natural methods used to raise dopamine levels and increase 
dopamine release, is by the use of bioactive compounds such 
as, naringenin, cyanidin, uridine; rutin, naringin, caffeine, 
vitamin D and amino acids. There continues to be a shortage 
of established procedures for examining the effects of bioac‑
tive compounds on dopamine levels in the brain. Some of the 
current studies systematically cover a number of different 
natural bioactive compounds which enhance dopamine levels, 
such as β‑phenylethylamine (β‑PEA), omega‑3 fatty acids and 
others that have been shown to enhance dopamine levels in 
the brain (6).
2. Dopamine
Dopamine (3,4‑dihydroxyphenethylamine) is an amine formed 
by removing a carboxyl group from the L‑DOPA (C8H11NO2) 
molecule (Fig. 1); it is an essential particle produced in the 
brain, kidneys and in plants, and in the majority of animals. 
Dopamine functions as a neurotransmitter, a substance 
produced by neurons to transmit information to other neurons. 
A recent study focused on how aromatherapy influences 
the treatment of neuro pathologies, such as Alzheimer's 
disease (7). The brain chemical, dopamine, affects behavior 
Bioactive compounds that enhance dopamine levels in the 
brain, with their challenges and future prospects (Review)
MOHAMED O. ELSAMANI1,2
1Department of Chemistry, Al‑Baha University, Al‑Baha 65527, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia;  
2Department of Food Sciences and Technology, Omdurman Islamic University, Omdurman, Khartoum 14415, Sudan
Received December 3, 2024;  Accepted February 19, 2026
DOI: 10.3892/wasj.2026.449
Correspondence to: Dr Mohamed O. Elsamani, Department of 
Chemistry, Al‑Baha University, P.O. Box‑1988, Al‑Baha City 65527, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
E‑mail: mhmdomer6@gmail.com
Key words: naringenin, cyanidin, rutin, uridine, caffeine

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
2
driven by rewards. The pituitary gland release of prolactin is 
suppressed by hypothalamic dopamine. There are five known 
subtypes of dopamine receptors in mammals, namely D1 
D2, D3, D4 and D5; there are two groups into which these 
receptors are separated. In humans, the trace amine‑associated 
receptor 1 has a high affinity for dopamine. Abnormal dopa‑
mine synthesis or metabolism has been related to addiction, 
bipolar disease and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (8). 
In a previous study, an in vitro neuronal cell line system was 
employed to examine the possible neuroprotective properties 
of Aloysia citrovorum‑derived essential oils against oxida‑
tive stress and amyloid‑induced neurotoxicity (9). The main 
enzyme that converts DOPA into dopamine is known as 
DOPA decarboxylase. Tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate‑limiting 
enzyme in the synthesis of dopamine, transforms tyrosine into 
DOPA (9). Considering the intimate association between the 
hippocampus and memory/learning processes, essential oils 
may change NDDs via altering the olfactory system. The 
process of converting L‑tyrosine to L‑DOPA is facilitated by 
the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (9). Furthermore, essential 
oils may function directly as therapies by modulating a variety 
of oxidative stress and inflammatory processes linked to 
NDDs. 
In certain cell types, such as neurons and cells found in 
the adrenal medulla, dopamine synthesis is achieved through a 
two‑step process (10). The synthesis of dopamine is under the 
control of homeostasis, which can increase or decrease produc‑
tion depending on the levels of extracellular dopamine (11). 
The essential components for this reaction are iron (Fe2+), 
diatomic oxygen (O2) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). 
The conversion of L‑DOPA to dopamine is catalyzed by 
aromatic L‑amino acid decarboxylase during neurotransmitter 
synthesis (12). The rate at which dopamine is synthesized is 
usually determined by the speed at which TH converts tyro‑
sine into L‑DOPA. The function of TH is carefully monitored 
by different methods, including phosphorylation at four serine 
residues by several kinases (12):
Dephosphorylation by two phosphatases: The regulation 
of enzyme activity through response inhibition by catechol‑
amine neurotransmitters, such as dopamine occurs through 
protein‑protein interactions with other enzymes and structural 
proteins. To create dopamine effectively, the body needs 
tyrosine, which can be obtained from dietary proteins or 
converted from phenylalanine. Even though dopamine can be 
found in certain foods, it is incapable of crossing the brain 
barrier, requiring the brain to synthesize it for proper neuronal 
functioning (9).
Degradation: Dopamine undergoes a process of break‑
down by specific enzymes to form inactive metabolites. The 
degradation of dopamine in the striatum is mostly carried out 
by MAO‑A, although both MAO‑A and MAO‑B are involved 
in its metabolism (13).
Catechol‑O‑methyl transferase (COMT). In order to 
degrade catecholamine neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, 
norepinephrine and epinephrine, the enzyme COMT trans‑
fers a methyl group from s‑adenylyl methionine to catechol 
substrates. The formation of O‑methylated metabolites of these 
neurotransmitters aids in stopping their signaling, particularly 
in areas of the brain with relatively low dopamine transporter 
expression, such as the prefrontal cortex (14).
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH): The primary result 
of dopamine degradation is Homovanillic acid, which is 
discharged through urine (9).
As regards dopamine receptors, these are classified into 
two main families: D1‑like receptors (D1 and D5) and D2‑like 
receptors (D2, D3 and D4). These receptors are distributed 
throughout the brain and play crucial roles in various physio‑
logical processes. As regards functions, the brain is filled with 
receptors that are vital for many physiological functions (11): 
Learning and motivation, memory and focus, pleasure and 
reward, mood and attention, movement and coordination, 
sleep regulation, pain processing and cardiovascular function.
As regards diseases and disorders, there is a correlation 
between dopamine dysfunction and multiple medical condi‑
tions (10). i) Parkinson's disease: Due to the degeneration 
of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, motor 
symptoms and impulsivity control disorders manifest (15). 
ii) Schizophrenia: The dysregulation of dopamine signaling 
affects the pathways of both the mesolimbic and mesocor‑
tical regions. iii) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: 
Related to changes in dopamine signaling that impact focus 
and self‑control. iv) Addiction: The presence of dopamine 
is essential for the brain to engage in rewarding activities 
that can become addictive. v) Tourette syndrome: Related to 
disruptions in dopamine signaling influencing motor function. 
vi) Bipolar disorder: Results in an imbalance of dopamine 
and other neurotransmitters impacting mood and behavior. 
Exploring the complex functions of dopamine in the brain 
and body is a vital research goal, potentially paving the way 
for groundbreaking therapies for various neurological and 
psychiatric conditions (15).
3. Bioactive compounds that enhance dopamine levels in 
the brain
Naringenin. Naringenin (molecular formula: C15H12O5) is the 
glycoside portion of the molecule Naringin that protects the 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic projection in neurotoxin models of 
Parkinson's disease, and it has a typical chemical structure (16). 
These characteristics are a basic flavonoid structure with 15 
carbon atoms and three rings, two of which are benzene rings 
that connect the three carbon chains (17). Naringenin, chemi‑
cally known as 4,5,7‑trihydroxyflavone, has a molar mass of 
272.3 and a melting point of 251°C (18). In nature, naringenin 
is solid and nearly insoluble in water, although it is soluble in 
organic solvents such as ethanol, ether, dimethyl form amide 
and dimethyl sulfoxide. Naringenin occurs primarily in citrus 
fruits such grapes, oranges, blood oranges, lemons and grape‑
fruit, with some research demonstrating a high concentration 
in citrus peel (19) (Fig. 2A). 
Figure 1. Dopamine (3,4‑dihydroxyphenethylamine) is an amine formed by 
removing a carboxyl group from the L‑DOPA (C8H11NO2) molecule. 

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
3
Recent experimental evidence indicates that naringin 
and naringenin demonstrate extensive pharmacological 
activity, with specific focus on neurodegenerative diseases 
including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, along with other 
neurological disorders, such as anxiety, depression, schizo‑
phrenia and chronic hyperglycemic peripheral neuropathy. 
Figure 2. (A) Naringenin (molecular formula: C15H12O5) in citrus fruits such grapes, oranges, oranges, lemons and grapefruit. (B) Neuroprotective mechanisms 
of naringenin (C15H12O5) in an experimental model of Parkinson's disease: Regulation of dopaminergic survival, GDNF expression, and TNF‑α/COX‑2‑driven 
neuro inflammation. GDNF, glial cell line‑derived neurotrophic factor; 1‑methyl‑4‑phenylpyridinium (MPP+) selectively targets dopaminergic neurons by 
uptake via the dopamine transporter (DAT), inhibiting mitochondrial complex I (NADH dehydrogenase) to disrupt electron transport, deplete ATP, and 
generate reactive oxygen species (ROS). This produces oxidative stress, apoptosis, and energy failure, emulating PD nigrostriatal degeneration.

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
4
Neurodegeneration is a complex process influenced by various 
factors, including oxidative stress, dopamine depletion, 
and neuro inflammation. Naringenin, a compound found in 
citrus fruits, has been shown to boost dopamine levels and 
possess anti‑inflammatory properties that can aid in reducing 
inflammation within the brain (20).
Naringenin may aid in the recovery of dopaminergic 
neurons following injury if it is administered shortly after the 
damage has occurred. Dopaminergic neurons are preserved, 
and glial cell line‑derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is 
restored in the substantia nigra (SN), and the number of neurons 
immune reactive for calcium‑binding adaptor molecule 1 
(Iba‑1) and necrosis factor α (TNF‑α) are also resorted (21). In 
the striatum was reduced as indicators of inflammation in the 
brain after pre‑treatment with naringenin in rats with unilat‑
eral 1‑methyl‑4‑phenylpyridinium (MPP+) injury. Eukaryotic 
initiation factor 4E‑binding protein 1 (4E‑BP1), and growth 
differentiation factor and GDNF were upregulated in the 
cerebellum following a single injection of naringin. Naringin 
then decreases TNF‑α and cyclooxygenase‑2 (COX‑2) levels 
and raises the transcription factor nuclear factor 2 (Nrf2) (20). 
The potential of naringin as an antioxidant shows promise 
in the treatment of neurology and diabetes. The decline of 
nerve cells and dopamine levels in the striatum and substantia 
nigra pars compacta eliminates dopamine‑producing cells, 
paving the way for the development of Parkinson's disease 
(Fig. 2B).
Changes in the brain's dendritic arborization and synaptic 
architecture have been shown to be associated with psycholog‑
ical and neurological disorders such as depression, anxiety and 
memory loss. Naringenin, a dietary flavanone found in citrus 
fruits, vegetables, berries and nuts, may play a significant role 
in addressing these issues (22).
Cyanidin. Cyanidin has been shown to protect SH‑SY5Y 
human neuroblastoma cells from MPP+‑induced toxicity, 
which serves as a model for Parkinson's disease. This finding 
highlights the potential therapeutic benefits of cyanidin in 
combating neurodegenerative diseases (23).
Cyanidin belongs to the flavonoid family of polyphenolic 
natural compounds. The molecular structure of cyanidin 
is illustrated in Fig. 3. It is commonly found in fruits and 
vegetables, as well as in leaves, petals, flowers and red fruits. 
Several vegetables and fruits including blackberries, red 
onions, grapes, cherries, apples, raspberries, peaches, plums, 
beans, red cabbage and cranberries contain cyanidin (24). 
Cyanidin have been shown to have potential therapeutic 
effects on a variety of disorders and are commonly recom‑
mended as medicines in several countries (25). Consumption 
cyanidins provide health benefits against the development of 
obesity and diabetes, as well as suppressing inflammatory. 
Cyanidin and its metabolites have higher absorption and 
bioavailability, and interaction with gut microbes may enhance 
their health benefits. Several in vitro studies have demonstrated 
the ability of cyanidin to reduce reactive oxygen species (26). 
Despite current reports indicating the various health benefits 
of cyanidin, its antioxidant potential through modulation of 
the Nrf2 pathway is still less defined in modulating oxidative 
stress against DNA damage, apoptosis, carcinogenic toxicity 
and inflammatory conditions (26). The administration of 
cyanidin shows promise as a potential pharmacological or 
functional food therapy for combating oxidative stress and 
protecting against Alzheimer's disease. Cyanidin possesses 
potent antioxidant properties and unique characteristics that 
render it a promising candidate for further research and devel‑
opment as a therapeutic agent. Therefore, it is imperative to 
conduct further in vivo studies to explore its potential benefits 
in greater detail (27). To further elucidate the molecular mech‑
anisms underlying the neuroprotective effects of cyanidin, a 
previous study investigated the effects of cyanidin on neuro‑
inflammation in human neuroblastoma cells (27). Although 
these findings indicate the potential benefits of cyanidin for 
neurological health, further research is necessary to estab‑
lish a direct association between cyanidin consumption and 
dopamine production or regulation in humans.
Rutin. Rutin, a flavonoid quercetin glycoside and the disac‑
charide rutinose (α‑L‑rhamnopyranosyl‑(1→6)‑β‑D‑gluc
opyranose) (Fig. 4), is found in numerous plants and fruits, 
partiuclarly buckwheat, apricots, cherries, grapes, grapefruit, 
peaches and oranges  (28). Pharmacological studies have 
reported the beneficial effects of rutin in several disease states, 
and its therapeutic potential in several models of non‑commu‑
nicable diseases has aroused great enthusiasm. The present 
review summarized the currently available knowledge on 
the mechanisms of action of rutin in different experimental 
models of diseases of the central nervous system. Rutin has 
been shown to upregulate the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene, 
a crucial component in the biosynthesis of dopamine (28) 
The mechanisms of action reviewed herein include reducing 
pro‑inflammatory cytokines, improving antioxidant enzyme 
activities, activating mitogen‑activated protein kinase cascade, 
downregulating mRNA expression of Multiple Sclerosis 
(MS)‑related and pro‑apoptotic genes, upregulating ion 
transport and anti‑apoptotic genes and restoring mitochon‑
drial complex enzyme activities. These findings suggest that 
rutin may be a promising neuroprotective compound for the 
treatment of atypical neurological disorders (29). 
Rutin has been found to upregulate the TH gene, a crucial 
component in dopamine biosynthesis (28). This discovery 
suggests that rutin may play a role in increasing dopamine 
production within the body. In a study utilizing a rat model of 
6‑hydroxydopamine (6‑OHDA)‑induced Parkinson's disease, 
pre‑treatment with rutin was shown to protect against the 
reduction in dopamine content and its metabolite 3,4‑dihydroxy‑
phenyl acetic acid (30). These results indicate that rutin could 
Figure 3. Molecular structure of cyanidin.

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
5
potentially help in maintaining optimal dopamine levels in the 
brain. Furthermore, rutin has exhibited neuroprotective proper‑
ties on dopaminergic neurons. In a previous study, in an animal 
model of Parkinson's disease, rutin was able to shield neurons in 
the substantia nigra from the detrimental effects of 6‑OHDA, 
indirectly supporting dopamine function (30). When combined 
with levodopa, a common medication used for Parkinson's 
disease, rutin was shown to mitigate the peripheral adverse 
effects of dopamine, such as nausea and hypotension (28). This 
suggests that rutin may enhance the efficacy of dopamine‑related 
treatments. Moreover, rutin has demonstrated antioxidant and 
anti‑inflammatory characteristics, which could contribute to its 
neuroprotective effects (31). By reducing oxidative stress and 
inflammation, rutin may aid in the preservation of dopaminergic 
neurons and the maintenance of dopamine levels. While these 
findings are promising, it is important to acknowledge that the 
majority of studies have been conducted using animal models 
or in vitro. Further research, particularly human clinical trials, is 
necessary to fully comprehend the effects of rutin on dopamine 
levels and its potential therapeutic applications in neurodegen‑
erative disorders. Rutin, a flavonoid present in numerous plants 
and fruits, has demonstrated promising effects on dopamine 
levels and neuroprotection in several studies (31).
Uridine. Uridine occurs primarily in blood and brain fluid, 
where it helps to maintain fundamental cellular activities that 
are influenced by enzyme activity, dietary patterns and ATP 
depletion. Certain mushrooms may have distinct synergistic 
effects with uridine, and antioxidants, potentially improving 
brain function (32,33). Uridine is contained in infant formulae 
as its monophosphate, UMP, which is bioavailable (34,35).
Uridine is known to play a crucial role in modulating 
neurotransmitter systems, specifically dopamine and sero‑
tonin. This nucleoside has been shown to potentially produce 
an anti‑epileptic effect by disrupting the dopaminergic system. 
Giant oyster mushrooms, lion's mane and tiger milk mushroom 
(a lesser‑known variation) promote neurite outgrowth, which 
regenerates nerve cells. They boosted nerve growth factor in 
both cells and animals. 
Several foods contain uridine in the form of RNA (36). 
Although it is claimed that virtually none of the uridine in 
this form is bioavailable, as demonstrated by Gasser et al (36) 
in 1981, it is destroyed in the liver and gastrointestinal tract, 
and no food, when consumed, has ever been reliably shown 
to elevate blood uridine levels. A previous study found that 
plasma uridine levels increased 1.8‑fold at 30 min following the 
consumption of beer, indicating at the very least inconsistent 
evidence (37). On the other hand, ethanol which is found in beer 
raises uridine levels, which may explain the increased Uridine 
plasma concentration rises due to pyrimidine breakdown after 
purine degradation by ethanol and fructose (38).
A number of natural products rich in uridine (Fig. 5), such 
as milk and dairy products from goats and sheep, tomatoes 
(0.5‑1.0 g uridine per kg/dry weight) (39), sugarcane extract, 
broccoli and beer (40), meats (such as the liver and pancreas) 
and Brewer's yeast (1.7% uridine, dry weight) (39). Uridine 
metabolism consists of three stages: De novo synthesis, salvage 
synthesis path and catabolism and homeostasis, which is closely 
related to glucose homeostasis, and the breakdown of amino 
acids (40). Uridine contributes to the glycolysis pathway of 
galactose (41). There is no metabolic mechanism that converts 
galactose. As a result, galactose is converted to glucose and 
metabolized by the common glucose pathway. Uridine is 
absorbed by the brain to generate CDP‑choline, a well‑known 
memory enhancer, as well as other phospholipids. In a study 
on healthy individuals who underwent brain imaging, uridine 
supplements boosted their brain levels of phosphor ethanol‑
amine (PE), a key phospholipid‑building component (42). 
Uridine is produced by the liver and is released during regular 
cell and RNA breakdown in humans, particularly during 
fasting from fat cells. As a result, uridine is constantly present 
in the circulation (43). Recently produced or recycled uridine 
engages in several critical activities in the brain and nervous 
system, including maintaining the lipid membranes of neural 
cells and creating connections between neurons, as it can pass 
the blood‑brain barrier (44). Additionally, it appears to bind to 
P2Y2, P2Y4, P2Y6 and P2Y14 receptors in the brain. However, 
it may also potentially be attached to other, yet unidentified 
receptors (45). Uridine is deemed to be a promising molecule 
for further research; however, there are presently few human 
clinical trials evaluating its effects and there is insufficient 
information available on its metabolism (Fig.  6) and its 
function in the brain (45).
Vitamin D and sunlight. Human skin produces vitamin D, a 
fat‑soluble vitamin, when it is exposed to sunlight. However, 
the majority of individuals do not receive sufficient levels of 
sun‑induced vitamin D. Researchers estimate that 50% of indi‑
viduals may not have sufficient levels vitamin D (46). Vitamin 
Figure 4. Molecular structure of rutin.
Figure 5. Natural products rich in uridine.

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
6
D is produced in the skin following exposure to UVB rays 
but without burns. In addition to the liver and kidneys, where 
1,25(OH)2D is produced in a paracrine/autocrine function, 
additional tissues also receive vitamin D subsequent metabo‑
lism to produce its primary circulating form, 25(OH)D, and 
hormonal form, 1,25(OH)2D. The immune system, intestinal 
epithelium, parathyroid gland, prostate gland and breast are a 
few types of these tissues (46).
Lower dopamine levels are caused by a vitamin D defi‑
ciency, while dopamine release is enhanced by vitamin D3 
therapy (47,48). One of the most natural methods to raise dopa‑
mine levels in the brain is to spend time in the sun. Studies 
have revealed that exposure to sunshine increases dopamine 
release (49,50).
Dopamine levels in the brain can rise following exposure 
to sunlight. To support dopamine, release, exposure to sunlight 
during the spring and summer seasons is mandatory. It is vital 
to expose the top of the face and head to sunlight to promote 
dopamine levels. It is therefore recommended that no head 
and face cover or sunglasses be used to increase the level of 
dopamine in the brain (51).
Dopamine D1 receptor (Drd1) signaling within the super‑
chiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is essential for resynchronizing 
activity rhythms in time with phase‑shifting light‑dark cycles 
and that raising the Dopamine (DA) tone through the selective 
activation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental 
area VTA accelerates photic stimulation (51). (Fig. 7), illus‑
trates the functional connection between dopaminergic 
neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and neurons in 
the SCN that express Drd1 receptors, demonstrating their 
direct neuroanatomical and functional link. Stimulating these 
neurons while recording SCN activity allows for functional 
assessment and real‑time study of the VTA‑SCN circuit 
dynamics, accelerating the response to light stimulation.
There are several natural products rich in vitamin D. 
According to studies, 25(OH)D appears to be roughly 5‑fold 
more potent than the parent vitamin in terms of increasing blood 
25(OH)D concentration (52,53). Further research discovered 
that when the 25(OH)D content of beef, pig, chicken, turkey 
and eggs is taken into consideration, the overall quantity of 
vitamin D in the meal is 2‑ to 18‑fold greater than the amount 
in the parent vitamin alone, depending on the food (52).
Vitamin B9 and magnesium (Mg). Vitamin B9 (folate) is 
a primary vitamin B that plays a key role in methyl‑group 
transfer reactions and is one of the most critical vitamins 
required for the optimal performance of energy and nervous 
system functions. The connection between mental health signs 
and B vitamins must be understood. Mental symptoms can be 
suppressed, and the disease duration may decrease with the 
use of vitamins B6, B8 and B12; individuals with low folate 
levels in their blood are at an increased risk of suffering from 
depression (54). One of the reasons for this is that folate is 
necessary for the production and enhancement of dopamine 
in the brain (54,55). When there are low folate blood levels, 
there will also be lower levels of dopamine as the body cannot 
Figure 6. Uridine metabolism phases and its function in the brain.

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
7
produce dopamine efficiently, contributing to depression (56). 
Another condition among depressed individuals is folate 
deficiencies; aproximately one‑third of depressive patients 
have an absolute deficiency. Water‑soluble vitamin folate is 
required for the correct production of dopamine, adrenaline 
and serotonin neurotransmitters (55). Natural folate sources 
include leafy greens, asparagus, brussels sprouts, avocado, 
beef liver, seeds and nuts (57). Natural compounds, such as 
magnesium are an essential mineral. Unfortunately, many 
individuals are deficient in it. This is unfortunate as it plays a 
role in >300 biochemical reactions in our body and is essential 
for optimal neurotransmitter activity. Magnesium has antide‑
pressant effects, one reason being that it increases dopamine 
activity in the brain (58). 
There are ample foods that are high in magnesium and 
the consumption of these foods on a regular basis can ensure 
adequate levels. Such foods include spinach, watercress, 
pumpkin seeds, almonds, avocados and nuts (58). 
Amino acids 
Phenylalanine (Phe) and tyrosine (Tyr). The only other known 
activities of aromatic amino acids in the brain, previously 
being parts of protein, are as precursors to the catecholamine 
(dopamine, norepinephrine and adrenaline) and the mono‑
amine neurotransmitter, serotonin. This latter biochemical 
association is critical due to brain concentrations of catechol‑
amine [tryptophan as (5HT), Phe and Tyr] and other precursor 
amino acids, which are in turn regulate the synthesis and 
release of these neurotransmitters (59). 
The large neutral amino acids and other amino acids that 
compete with them for a shared transporter across the blood 
brain barrier, as well as physiological and pathophysiological 
variables that affect the blood concentrations of these amino 
acids predictably alter the concentrations of aromatic amino 
acids in the brain, the production and release of certain mono‑
amine transmitters, and subsequently the way in which the 
brain functions (59,60). 
With an emphasis on the Tyr‑catecholamine association, the 
present review takes into account the research demonstrating 
that precursor availability affects monoamine synthesis, as 
well as the physiological variables that affect the connection. 
The hypothesis that Phe functions as a substrate with Tyr for 
Tyr hydroxylase and is not an inhibitor of this enzyme in vivo 
at normal and even high concentrations, is supported by the 
consideration of the role of Phe in catecholamine produc‑
tion. The present review also discusses how Tyr‑mediated 
modifications to catecholamine production affect brain 
activities (61). 
The enzyme TH catalyzes the first step, which is hydroxyl‑
ation to DOPA. Aromatic L‑amino acid decarboxylase rapidly 
converts DOPA to dopamine after it is produced. In neurons 
that employ dopamine as a transmitter, enzymatic alteration 
stops there. An extra enzyme called dopamine‑by‑hydroxylase 
is present in neurons that employ norepinephrine as a trans‑
mitter, and it transforms dopamine into norepinephrine. 
Phenylethanolamine N‑methyltransferase is an extra enzyme 
found in neurons that use epinephrine as a transmitter. It 
catalyzes the conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine. Tyr 
hydroxylation, the first step in the route, is rate limiting, which 
means that it regulates the rate of synthesis throughout the 
whole pathway (61,62). Initial research has revealed that the 
enzyme is susceptible to end‑product inhibition (63). 
A previous in vivo study tracked the rate at which 14C‑Tyr 
converted to 14C catecholamine in the brains of rats given a 
medication to increase endogenous catecholamine concentra‑
tions (such as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor) or in vitro using 
enzyme preparations (64). Subsequent research revealed that 
TH was susceptible to several other regulators, such as an 
enzyme that is rapidly activated in response to an increase in 
neuronal activity (i.e., synthesis rises during times of greater 
neuronal demand (65). Additional research revealed that 
administering the amino acid to increase brain Tyr concen‑
trations can rapidly accelerate the production of DOPA in rat 
brains (66). This result implied that Tyr concentrations are 
at much below saturation levels in the area around TH. This 
discovery was further refined to demonstrate that neuronal 
activity was necessary, at least in DA neurons, to detect a 
precursor‑linked stimulation of DA production. For instance, 
Tyr administration may increase the synthesis of dopamine in 
the corpus striatum, which is home to a significant terminal 
projection from DA cell bodies in the substantia nigra. 
However, to activate the neurons in these rats, pre‑treatment 
with a DA receptor antagonist was necessary (67). 
DA neurons in the rat retina provide a physiological illus‑
tration of the requirements for neuronal activity. The retina 
has a large amount of light‑sensitive dopamine interneurons, 
which are quiescent in darkness, but become active in light. 
Neuronal activity is associated with TH activation (68). If acti‑
vation is typically necessary for Tyr administration to raise Tyr 
hydroxylation rate, Tyr injection should increase hydroxylation 
rate in retinas during the day but not at night, (69,70). DOPA 
concentrations typically accumulate linearly for 30 min after 
drug administration, providing an accurate estimate of the 
Figure 7. The image illustrates the functional connection between dopa‑
minergic neurons in the VTA and neurons in the SCN that express Drd1 
receptors, demonstrating their direct neuroanatomical and functional link. 
Stimulating these neurons while recording SCN activity allows for the func‑
tional assessment and real‑time analysis of the VTA‑SCN circuit dynamics, 
accelerating the response to light stimulation. VTA, ventral tegmental area; 
SCN, suprachiasmatic nucleus.

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
8
hydroxylation rate and overall rate of catecholamine synthesis, 
phenylethanolamine N‑methyltransferase is a key enzyme in 
the biosynthesis of catecholamines, specifically catalyzing the 
conversion of norepinephrine (noradrenaline) into epinephrine 
(adrenaline), the mechanism of biosynthesis for catecholamine 
neurotransmitter appearances on (Fig. 8). 
This reaction represents the terminal step in catechol‑
amine biosynthesis and is crucial for stress responses and 
various physiological functions as the hydroxylation step 
is rate‑limited in the pathway  (70,71). A previous study 
examined how L‑Tyrosine (TYR), a biological precursor of 
dopamine believed to improve creativity and cognitive regu‑
lation, promotes creativity in both divergent and convergent 
thinking (72). While TYR did promote convergent (or ‘deep’) 
thinking, no evidence could be found that it had any influence 
on divergent (or ‘brainstorming’). That study indicated that 
TYR may support control‑hungry creative processes, since 
convergent thinking may require more cognitive top‑down 
control. The meals consumed may thus have an impact on 
thought processes (72). Tyrosine is hydroxylase to L‑DOPA 
by tyrosine hydroxylase, whereas phenylalanine hydroxy‑
lase converts tyrosine to tyrosine. The enzyme aromatic 
amino acid decarboxylase transforms DOPA into dopamine. 
Dopamine‑hydroxylase catalyzes the conversion of dopamine 
to norepinephrine, and is then methylated to epinephrine by 
phenylethanolamine N‑methyltransferase. The enzyme that 
limits the rate of the pathway is tyrosine hydroxylase (72). 
Monoterpene hydrocarbons, particularly pinene, have been 
shown to be critical components in essential oils, responsible 
for effects such as metal chelation, free radical scavenging, 
enhancing reducing power and inhibiting certain enzyme 
functions (73). Since acute β‑PEA administration increased 
the active psychomotor behaviors of β‑PEA‑administered 
mice and produced a positive emotional state, the dopamine 
concentration and dopamine‑related protein expression of rats 
administered β‑PEA was investigated to determine whether 
β‑PEA changes dopaminergic neurotransmission (74). The 
results revealed that the rats administered acute β‑PEA had 
Figure 8. The mechanism of biosynthesis for catecholamine neurotransmitters.

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
9
significantly higher levels of dopamine than the saline control 
group (74). Moreover, when rats received β‑PEA immediately, 
it significantly improved their tyrosine hydroxylase levels and 
immune responses relative to the saline control group. The 
immunological responses of DAT and vesicular monoamine 
transporter 2 (VMAT‑2) levels, however, did not change 
between the β‑PEA‑administered rats and the saline control 
group (74). Acute β‑PEA treatment in mice enhanced the 
level of striatal dopamine, as well as the expression of p‑DAT 
and TH, an enzyme that limits the production of dopamine. 
According to the findings, acute β‑PEA injection is expected 
to cause p‑DAT, reverse DAT function, and ultimately boost 
dopamine neurotransmission in the striatum. Notably, it was 
discovered that locomotor activity remained unaltered even 
after acutely administering 50 mg/kg β‑PEA, which increased 
the striatal dopamine concentration It was revealed that mice 
treated with β‑PEA had higher amounts of striatal dopamine 
and greater locomotor activity, as well as stereotyped behaviors 
such as grooming. (74). However, in an alternative investiga‑
tion, β‑PEA at an elevated dose of 50 mg/kg heightened 
circling, which is recognized as stereotyped behavior, and the 
head‑twitching reaction, which is deemed to be a behavioral 
indicator of the hallucinogenic effect in humans through the 
hyper stimulation of dopaminergic neurotransmission (75).
Natural products rich in Phe and Tyr. The following foods 
are excellent providers of Phe and Tyr: Meats (lamb, venison, 
hog and beef), fowl (duck, goose, turkey and chicken), seafood 
(shrimp, lobster, mackerel, salmon, trout and tuna), eggs, dairy 
products (yoghurt, cheese and milk), nuts (cashews, walnuts, 
macadamia nuts, pistachios and almonds), pumpkin, squash, 
hemp and sunflower seeds, nut butters (such as cashew, 
almond and peanut butter), legumes (beans, black beans, 
chickpeas and lentils), whole grains (wheat, barley, rye, oats 
and quinoa), soy goods (edamame, tempeh, tofu, soybeans) 
and protein supplements (76). Phe is present in a wide variety 
of high‑protein plant and animal foods, such as meat, fish, 
poultry and legumes. Aspartame, an artificial sweetener 
frequently added to diet soda and other sugar‑free meals, 
also contains Phe (76). Natural protein or dietary Phe intake 
is limited by the European Phenylketonuria Guidelines to no 
>25% of daily intake to maintain target blood Phe concentra‑
tions (77). Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive 
genetic disorder of phenylalanine metabolism caused by a 
deficiency of the enzyme hydroxylase, which catalyzes the 
conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine (76). The enzyme 
which regulates the rate of dopamine production is known as 
tyrosine hydroxylase, or Tyr H. The hydroxylation of tyrosine 
into L‑DOPA is catalyzed through; hormones and neurotrans‑
mitters in the central and peripheral nervous systems, 
catecholamine dopamine, epinephrine and norepinephrine 
are the end products of the route. In the latter case, the adrenal 
medulla synthesizes them (78,79). Several brain processes, 
including attention (80), memory cognition (81) and emotion, 
are influenced by these catechol monoamines (82,83). The 
hormone known as the fight‑or‑flight response, epinephrine, 
which is generated by the adrenal gland, has an impact 
on several bodily tissues (84). As a result, variations in 
catecholamine levels can have a variety of effects, possibly 
including elevated blood pressure, addiction, dystonia and 
bipolar disorder (85,86). Tyr H is the slowest enzyme in the 
process; therefore, its activity is highly relevant to a number 
of biomedical research disciplines. The complex nature of 
Tyr H regulation is logical considering the significance of 
its function. Research on transcription processes controlling 
its production, as well as the relatively recent topic of its 
destruction in the proteasome over degradation is extremely 
active (87).
Omega‑3 fatty acids. The main sources of omega‑3 fatty 
acids are cold water fish, such as Salmon, dark‑water cod, 
sailfish, sardines and herring. In a study that nurtured rats 
with omega‑3 adipose acids and a control group that did not 
receive these acids, the animals fed the omega‑3 adipose acids 
had 40% more dopamine in their frontal brain than rats on 
the control diet, and more advanced situations of dopamine 
in the brain than the animals that did not receive the omega‑3 
adipose acids (88). That study also noted a decrease in the 
enzyme that breaks down dopamine and increased dopamine 
binding to dopamine receptors (88). Research also shows that 
omega‑3 adipose acids can help restore normal dopamine 
release following traumatic brain injury (89). Considering 
the widespread relevance of marine omega‑3 fatty acids, it is 
recommended to consume fish or other seafood 1‑2 times per 
week, particularly fatty (dark flesh) fish high in eicosatetrae‑
noic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) (90). This is 
paraticularly crucial for women who are pregnant or who wish 
to become pregnant, as well as nursing mothers. A developing 
child also needs a consistent supply of DHA from the third 
trimester to the second year of life to create the brain and other 
elements of the nervous system, as DHA is the most abundant 
fatty acid in the brain. While the evidence for harm from a 
lack of omega‑3 fats is significantly more consistent and there 
is a balance of benefit vs. risk, a number of women avoid eating 
fish out of fear that mercury and other potential pollutants 
would harm their future children (91). 
The strongest evidence yet for the beneficial effects of 
omega‑3 fats comes from heart disease. These fats appear to 
help maintain a regular heartbeat as opposed to an irregular 
one, which may be fatal (92). These arrhythmias account for 
the majority of the >500,000 cardiac‑related deaths that occur 
in the USA annually. Furthermore, omega‑3 fats lower blood 
pressure and heart rate, while improving blood vessel health. 
Increased doses lower triglycerides and inflammation, both of 
which are factors in the development of atherosclerosis (92). 
Omega‑3 fatty acids (omega‑3s) include a carbon‑carbon 
double bond that is located three carbons from the methyl end 
of the chain. Foods high in omega‑3s, or n‑3s, include fish oil 
and flaxseed, as well as dietary supplements. The majority 
of the scientific research focuses on three types of omega‑3 
fatty acids (Fig. 9): Alpha‑linoleic acid (ALA), EPA and DHA. 
With 20 and 22 carbon atoms, respectively, EPA and DHA 
are considered long‑chain (LC) omega‑3s, although ALA 
only possesses 18 carbon atoms. As a result, linoleic acid and 
ALA are considered as essential fatty acids, which indicates 
that they can only be received via food (93). Only a minimal 
amount of conversion (<15%) has been reported between ALA 
and EPA and DHA, which occurs mostly in the liver (92). 
Therefore, the only feasible option to raise levels of these fatty 
acids in the body is to consume EPA and DHA directly from 
meals and/or dietary supplements. 

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
10
Natural products rich in omega‑3s. Variations exist in fish's 
omega‑3 content. High concentrations of long‑chain omega‑3 
fatty acids (LC omega‑3s) are found in cold‑water fatty fish, 
such salmon, mackerel, tuna, herring, and sardines; low‑fat fish, 
like cod, tilapia, and bass, and shellfish, have small concentra‑
tions (92). The association between the omega‑3 concentration 
in fish and the makeup of their diet is also evident (94). DHA 
and EPA levels in farmed fish are typically greater than in 
wild fish, but this varies depending on the diet (94). The plant 
oils canola, soybean and flaxseed (linseed) oils are among 
those that contain ALA, (92,93). Additionally, high in ALA 
are walnuts and chia seeds. Certain foods are fortified with 
DHA and other omega‑3s, including several types of yogurts, 
eggs, milk, juices and soy drinks. In the USA, the majority 
of newborn formulae on the market since 2002 have included 
DHA and arachidonic acid, which are the two most common 
LC PUFAs in the brain (95).
Caffeine. Caffeine is the most frequently utilized psychoactive 
substance (96). Caffeine maintains dopamine levels higher, 
particularly in brain regions associated with ‘attention’. 
Caffeine enhances sustained attention and attentiveness 
through this neurochemical interaction and lowers tiredness 
feelings (97,98). Its pharmacological effects on behavior are 
comparable to those of stimulants (methylphenidate and 
amphetamine) and 2‑phenyl methyl‑sulfinyl acetamide, is the 
standard IUPAC chemical name for Modafinil, which boost 
dopamine signaling by augmenting dopamine release from 
the terminals or inhibiting dopamine transporters (99,101). 
The stimulating, relaxing and reinforcing effects of these 
medications are due to their dopamine‑enhancing proper‑
ties (100,102‑104). On the other hand, On the other hand, 
preclinical research suggests that the antagonistic actions 
of caffeine on adenosine receptors (A1 and A2A subtypes) 
improves their pharmacological effects (104). Its antagonistic 
action on striatal A2A receptor (A2AR) has been specifically 
linked to dopamine effects (105). Similarly, as A2AR mutant 
animals lack these responses, caffeine‑induced increases 
in locomotor activity and emotion appear to be mediated 
by A2AR (106,107). Additionally, the effects of caffeine on 
wakefulness are disrupted when A2AR expression is silenced 
in the nucleus accumbency using short‑hairpin RNA (108).
Other studies have demonstrated that caffeine causes the 
brain dopamine levels to rise, (109,110); additionally an excel‑
lent approach to raising dopamine levels is to drink coffee. It 
also increases dopamine receptors and improves dopamine 
signaling (111). Dopamine levels in the brain are increased by 
coffee and other stimulants. This may be due to the good taste 
of coffee. However, coffee and caffeine may interfere with sleep; 
thus, their consumption should be avoided in the evening and 
before bed. Finally, attempting to consume all the coffee fruit as 
opposed to simply coffee or pure caffeine may be beneficial. The 
coffee bean is traditionally removed from the coffee fruit to be 
roasted. The fruit that surrounds it is thrown away. However, this 
is problematic since the coffee fruit has several beneficial ingredi‑
ents that are absent from coffee beans. Furthermore, using whole 
coffee fruit concentrate has been shown to considerably improve 
cognitive performance (112). It has also been demonstrated that 
tea raises dopamine levels in the brain. This includes black tea, 
as well as green tea (113). The amino acid threonine is present in 
both black and green tea. Additionally, it has been demonstrated 
that threonine crosses the blood‑brain barrier and markedly 
increases dopamine release in the brain (114‑116). Caffeine natu‑
rally occurs in plant leaves, seeds and fruits, substitute, where 
it acts as a natural herbicide, insect repellent and pollinator 
attractants Caffeine naturally occurs in plant leaves, seeds and 
fruits, (117,118). This botanically consequent chemical is the 
most widely used stimulant globally (119). Caffeine enters the 
human diet through plant‑based foods (Fig. 10), such as coffee 
beans, tea leaves, guarana, cocoa beans, and kola nuts (120). 
Coffee is a key caffeine source in the diet (121).
4. Challenges and future prospects
The focus of the present review was to summarize the 
significance of natural bioactive compounds that contribute 
to boosting dopamine levels in the brain by influencing the 
amount of central nerve dopamine. Numerous direct investiga‑
tions have been conducted in which nerve dopamine levels were 
gradually boosted, as well as dopamine generation utilizing 
numerous well‑studied plants. Natural bioactive chemicals 
can enhance neuronal dopamine levels. The study of natural 
Figure 10. Natural products rich in caffeine.
Figure 9. Chemical structure of three types of omega‑3 fatty acids.

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
11
and bioactive compounds has attracted increasing attention 
due to their direct influence on brain health, physiological 
activities and medicinal and edible properties. Researchers 
have conducted numerous studies on bioactive compounds 
and their biological efficacy for living organisms. However, 
the extraction process, structure determination, activity and 
mechanism of these bioactive compounds have not formed 
systematic theoretical and technical system, which greatly 
limits their functional application. Therefore, the majority of 
commercially available natural products are functional foods 
containing bioactive compounds that affect dopamine levels 
in the brain. The main reasons for this situation are as follows: 
The composition, structure and activity of bioactive 
compounds in increasing dopamine levels in the culture 
medium are relatively different, and the association between 
the source, chemical structure and biological activity is not yet 
clear. Even for well‑studied plant compounds, there are only 
some preliminary discussions on the relationship of structure 
to biological activity in humans. However, the majority of 
studies on biological activity are at the cell and/or animal level; 
only a limited number of clinical or preclinical studies have 
been conducted, and the mechanism of biological activity still 
needs further confirmation. These issues impede the transla‑
tion of biologically active ingredients that regulate dopamine 
levels in the human brain.
The industrial production of bioactive chemicals in the 
human brain suffers by the absence of efficient techniques 
for extraction, purification, or synthesis, and several small 
molecular active ingredients remain in the phase of structural 
elucidation and in vitro activity validation.
The advancement of technological systems to maximize 
the utilization of bioactive compounds in food, healthcare 
products and clinical medicine is essential for improving brain 
dopamine levels.
5. Conclusion
In order to develop an effective preventive and therapeutic 
strategy, it is crucial to possess a thorough understanding of 
the bioactive compounds that impact brain dopamine levels. 
These compounds play a vital role in preventing neurodegen‑
erative diseases linked to fluctuations in brain dopamine levels, 
improving cognitive functions such as memory and focus, height‑
ening feelings of pleasure, regulating mood and attention and 
managing psychiatric disorders. Researchers need to transition 
from investigating the antioxidant properties of natural bioactive 
compounds to determining the ideal brain dopamine levels based 
on factors such as age, gender, and developmental stages.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Funding
No funding was received.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Authors' contributions
The author (MOE) has confirmed the authenticity of all the 
raw data and have reviewed and approved the final version of 
the manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Patient consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Use of artificial intelligence tools
During the preparation of this work, AI tools were used to 
improve the readability and language of the manuscript or to 
generate images, and subsequently, the authors revised and 
edited the content produced by the AI tools as necessary, 
taking full responsibility for the ultimate content of the present 
manuscript.
References
  1.	Sairazi NS and Sirajudeen KNS: Natural products and their 
bioactive compounds: Neuroprotective potentials against 
neurodegenerative diseases. Evid Based Complement Alternat 
Med 2020: 6565396, 2020.
  2.	Liu Z, Zhou T, Ziegler AC, Dimitrion P and Zuo L: Oxidative 
stress in neurodegenerative Diseases: From molecular mecha‑
nisms to clinical applications. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2017: 
2525967, 2017. 
  3.	Sharifi‑Rad  M, Lankatillake  C, Dias  DA, Docea  AO, 
Mahomoodally MF, Lobine D, Chazot PL, Kurt B, Tumer TB, 
Moreira AC, et al: Impact of natural compounds on neurode‑
generative disorders: From preclinical to pharmacotherapeutics. 
J Clin Med 9: 1061, 2020.
  4.	Naomi R, Yazid MD, Teoh SH, Balan SS, Shariff H, Kumar J, 
Bahari H and Embong H: Dietary polyphenols as a protection 
against cognitive decline: Evidence from animal experiments; 
mechanisms and limitations. Antioxidants (Basel) 12: 1054, 
2023.
  5.	Ramis MR, Sarubbo F, Moranta D, Tejada S, Lladó J, Miralles A 
and Esteban S: Cognitive and neurochemical changes following 
polyphenol‑Enriched diet in rats. Nutrients 13: 59, 2020.
  6.	Grosso  C, Santos  M and Barroso  MF: From plants to 
Psycho‑neurology: Unravelling the therapeutic benefits of bioac‑
tive compounds in brain disorders. Antioxidants (Basel) 12: 
1603, 2023.
  7.	 Bonacaro A, Arosio M, Svelto A and Tettamanti M: The effects 
of essential oil and massage on patients affected by Alzheimer's 
disease. J Gerontological Nurs 48: 39‑47, 2022. 
  8.	Xu  H and Yang  F: The interplay of dopamine metabolism 
abnormalities and mitochondrial defects in the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia. Transl Psychiatry 12: 464, 2022.
  9.	Daubner SC, Le T and Wang S: Tyrosine hydroxylase and regula‑
tion of dopamine synthesis. Arch Biochem Biophys 508: 1‑12, 
2010.
10.	Cruickshank L, Kennedy AR and Shankland N: ‘CSD Entry 
TIRZAX: 5‑(2 Ammonioethyl)‑2‑hydroxyphenolate, Dopamine’. 
Cambridge Structural Database: Access Structures. Cambridge 
Crystallographic Data Centre, 2013 doi:10.5517/cc10m9nl.
11.	 Best JA, Nijhout HF and Reed MC: Homeostatic mechanisms in 
dopamine synthesis and release: A mathematical model. Theor 
Biol Med Model 6: 21, 2009.

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
12
12.	Berry MD, Juorio AV and Li XM: Aromatic L‑amino acid decar‑
boxylase: A neglected and misunderstood enzyme. Neurochem 
Res 21: 1075‑1087, 1996.
13.	Cho HU, Kim S and Sim J: Redefining differential roles of 
MAO‑A in dopamine degradation and MAO‑B in tonic GABA 
synthesis. Exp Mol Med 53: 1148‑1158, 2021. 
14.	 Akil M, Kolachana BS, Rothmond DA, Hyde TM, Weinberger DR 
and Kleinman JE: Catechol‑O‑methyl transferase genotype 
and dopamine regulation in the human brain. J Neurosci 23: 
2008‑2013, 2003.
15.	Franco R, Reyes‑Resina I and Navarro G: Dopamine in health 
and disease: Much more than a neurotransmitter. Biomedicines 9: 
109, 2021.
16.	Joshi R, Kulkarni YA and Wairkar S: Pharmacokinetic, pharma‑
codynamic and formulations aspects of Naringenin: An update. 
Life Sci 215: 43‑56, 2018.
17.	 Kumar S and Pandey AK: Chemistry and biological activities of 
flavonoids: An overview. ScientificWorldJournal 2013: 162750, 
2013. 
18.	Gattuso G, Barreca D, Gargiulli C, Leuzzi U and Caristi C: 
Flavonoid composition of citrus juices. Molecules 12: 1641‑1673, 
2007.
19.	 Shilpa  VS, Shams  R, Dash  KK, Pandey  VK, Dar  AH, 
Ayaz Mukarram S, Harsányi E and Kovács B: Phytochemical 
properties, extraction, and pharmacological benefits of naringin: 
A review. Molecules 28: 5623, 2023.
20.	Emran TB, Islam F, Nath N, Sutradhar H, Das R, Mitra S, 
Alshahrani MM, Alhasaniah AH and Sharma R: Naringin and 
naringenin polyphenols in neurological diseases: Understandings 
from a therapeutic viewpoint. Life (Basel) 13: 99, 2022.
21.	 Chen C, Wei YZ, He XM, Li DD, Wang GQ, Li JJ and Zhang F: 
Naringenin produces neuroprotection against LPS‑Induced 
dopamine neurotoxicity via the inhibition of microglial NLRP3 
inflammasome activation. Front Immunol 10: 936, 2019.
22.	Yilmaz  E, Acar  G, Onal  U, Erdogan  E, Baltaci  AK and 
Mogulkoc R: Effect of 2‑Week naringin supplementation on 
neurogenesis and BDNF levels in ischemia‑reperfusion model of 
rats. Neuromolecular Med 26: 4, 2024.
23.	Chen J, Sun J, Jiang J and Zhou J: Cyanidin protects SH‑SY5Y 
human neuroblastoma cells from 1‑Methyl‑4‑Phenylpyridinium-
induced neurotoxicity. Pharmacology 102: 126‑132, 2018.
24.	de Araújo FF, de Paulo Farias D, Neri‑Numa IA and Pastore GM: 
Polyphenols and their applications: An approach in food chem‑
istry and innovation potential. Food Chem 338: 127535, 2021. 
25.	Cao  G, Muccitelli  HU, Sánchez‑Moreno  C and Prior  RL: 
Anthocyanins are absorbed in glycated forms in elderly women: 
A pharmacokinetic study. Am J Clin Nutr 73: 920‑906, 2001. 
26.	Rahman S, Mathew S, Nair P, Ramadan WS and Vazhappilly CG: 
Health benefits of cyanidin‑3‑glucoside as a potent modulator 
of Nrf2‑mediated oxidative stress. Inflammopharmacology 29: 
907‑923, 2021. 
27.	 Thummayot S, Tocharus C, Jumnongprakhon P, Suksamrarn A 
and Tocharus J: Cyanidin attenuates Aβ25‑35‑induced neuro‑
inflammation by suppressing NF‑κB activity downstream of 
TLR4/NOX4 in human neuroblastoma cells. Acta Pharmacol 
Sin 39: 1439‑1452, 2018.
28.	Enogieru AB, Haylett W, Hiss DC, Bardien S and Ekpo OE: 
Rutin as a potent antioxidant: Implications for neurodegenerative 
disorders. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2018: 6241017, 2018.
29.	Chaudhuri A: Multiple sclerosis is primarily a neurodegenerative 
disease. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 120: 1463‑1466, 2013. 
30.	Khan MM, Raza SS, Javed H, Ahmad A, Khan A, Islam F, 
Safhi MM and Islam F: Rutin protects dopaminergic neurons 
from oxidative stress in an animal model of Parkinson's disease. 
Neurotox Res 22: 1‑5, 2012.
31.	 Budzynska B, Faggio C, Kruk‑Slomka M, Samec D, Nabavi SF, 
Sureda A, Devi KP and Nabavi SM: Rutin as neuroprotective 
agent: From bench to bedside. Curr Med Chem 26: 5152‑5164, 
2019.
32.	Phan CW, David P, Wong KH, Naidu M and Sabaratnam V: 
Uridine from pleurotus giganteus and its neurite outgrowth 
stimulatory effects with underlying mechanism. PLoS One 10: 
e0143004, 2015.
33.	Phan CW, Wong WL, David P, Naidu M and Sabaratnam V: 
Pleurotus giganteus (Berk.) Karunarathna & K.D. Hyde: 
Nutritional value and in vitro neurite outgrowth activity in rat 
pheochromocytoma cells. BMC Complement Altern Med 12: 
102, 2012.
34.	Wurtman RJ: A nutrient combination that can affect synapse 
formation. Nutrients 6: 1701‑1710, 2014.
35.	 Carver JD: Advances in nutritional modifications of infant 
formulas. Am J Clin Nutr 77 (Suppl): 1550S‑1554S, 2003.
36.	Gasser T, Moyer JD and Handschumacher RE: Novel Single‑pass 
exchange of circulating uridine in rat liver. Science 213: 777‑778, 
1981.
37.	 Yamamoto T, Moriwaki Y, Takahashi S, Tsutsumi Z, Ka T, 
Fukuchi M and Hada T: Effect of beer on the plasma concen‑
trations of uridine and purine bases. Metabolism 51: 1317‑1323, 
2002.
38.	Yamamoto T, Moriwaki Y, Takahashi S, Yamakita J, Tsutsumi Z, 
Ohata H, Hiroishi K, Nakano T and Higashino K: Effect of 
ethanol and fructose on plasma uridine and purine bases. 
Metabolism 46: 544‑547, 1997.
39.	 Hidalgo A, Pompei C, Galli A and Cazzola S: Uracil as an index 
of lactic acid bacteria contamination of tomato products. J Agric 
Food Chem 53: 349‑355, 2005.
40.	Zhang Y, Guo S, Xie C and Fang J: Uridine metabolism and its 
role in glucose, lipid, and amino acid homeostasis. Biomed Res 
Int 2020: 7091718, 2020. 
41.	 Stryer B and T: Glycolysis Is an Energy‑Conversion Pathway in 
Many Organisms. In: Stryer B and Tymoczko JL, (eds.) Glycolysis 
Is an Energy‑Conversion Pathway in Many Organisms. 5th 
edition, New York, W H Freeman, 2002.
42.	Agarwal N, Sung YH, Jensen JE, daCunha G, Harper D, Olson D 
and Renshaw PF: Short‑term administration of uridine increases 
brain membrane phospholipid precursors in healthy adults: 
A 31‑phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy study at 4T. 
Bipolar Discord 12: 825‑833, 2010. 
43.	Yamamoto T, Koyama H, Kurajoh M, Shoji T, Tsutsumi Z and 
Moriwaki Y: Biochemistry of uridine in plasma. Clin Chim 
Acta 412: 1712‑1724, 2011.
44.	Cansev M: Uridine and cytidine in the brain: Their transport and 
utilization. Brain Res Rev 52: 389‑397, 2006. 
45.	Dobolyi A, Juhasz G, Kovacs Z and Kardos J: Uridine function in 
the central nervous system. Curr Top Med Chem 11: 1058‑1067, 
2011. 
46.	Bikle  DD:  Feingold KR ABBM. Vitamin D: Production, 
Metabolism and Mechanisms of Action. In: Vitamin D: 
Production, Metabolism and Mechanisms of Action. South 
Dartmouth (MA), 2021. 
47.	 Trinko JR, Land BB, Solecki WB, Wickham RJ, Tellez LA, 
Maldonado‑Aviles  J, de Araujo  IE, A Addy  N and 
DiLeone RJ: Vitamin D3: A role in dopamine circuit regula‑
tion, diet‑induced obesity, and drug consumption. eNeuro 3: 
ENEURO.0122‑15.2016, 2016. 
48.	Kesby JP, Cui X, Ko P, McGrath JJ, Burne THJ and Eyles DW: 
Developmental vitamin D deficiency alters dopamine turnover in 
neonatal rat forebrain. Neurosci Lett 461: 155‑158, 2009. 
49.	 Aubert PM, Seibyl JP, Price JL, Harris TS, Filbey FM, Jacobe H, 
Devous MD Sr and Adinoff B: Dopamine efflux in response to 
ultraviolet radiation in addicted sunbed users. Psychiatry Res 
Neuroimaging 251: 7‑14, 2016. 
50.	Tsai HY, Chen KC, Yang YK, Chen PS, Yeh TL, Chiu NT and 
Lee IH: Sunshine‑exposure variation of human striatal dopa‑
mine D2/D3 receptor availability in healthy volunteers. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 35: 107‑110, 2011. 
51.	 Grippo RM, Purohit AM, Zhang Q, Zweifel LS and Güler AD: 
Direct midbrain dopamine input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
accelerates circadian entrainment. Curr Biol 27: 2465‑2475.e3, 
2017. 
52.	Taylor CL, Patterson KY, Roseland JM, Wise SA, Merkel JM, 
Pehrsson PR and Yetley EA: Including food 25‑hydroxyvitamin 
D in intake estimates may reduce the discrepancy between 
dietary and serum measures of vitamin D status. J Nutri 144: 
654‑659, 2014. 
53.	 Cashman  KD, Seamans  KM, Lucey  AJ, Stöcklin  E, 
Weber P, Kiely M and Hill TR: Relative effectiveness of oral 
25‑hydroxyvitamin D3 and vitamin D3 in raising wintertime 
serum 25‑hydroxyvitamin D in older adults. J Clin Nutri 95: 
1350‑1356, 2012.
54.	Leahy LG: Vitamin B Supplementation: What's the right choice 
for your patients? J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv 55: 7‑11, 
2017. 
55.	 Miller AL: The methylation, neurotransmitter, and antioxidant 
connections between folate and depression. Altern Med Rev 13: 
216‑226, 2008.
56.	Bottiglieri T, Laundy M, Crellin R, Toone BK, Carney MW 
and Reynolds  EH: Homocysteine, Folate, methylation, and 
monoamine metabolism in depression. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 69: 228‑232, 2000.

WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCES JOURNAL  8:  34,  2026
13
57.	 Cuskelly GJ, McNulty H and Scott JM: Effect of increasing 
dietary folate on red‑cell folate: Implications for prevention of 
neural tube defects. Lancet 347: 657‑659, 1996.
58.	Cardoso CC, Lobato KR, Binfaré RW, Ferreira PK, Rosa AO, 
Santos AR and Rodrigues AL: Evidence for the involvement of 
the monoaminergic system in the Antidepressant‑like effect of 
magnesium. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 33: 
235‑242, 2009.
59.	 Fernstrom JD: Aromatic amino acids and monoamine synthesis 
in the central nervous system: Influence of the diet. J Nutr 
Biochem 1: 508‑517, 1990. 
60.	Fernstrom JD: Role of precursor availability in control of mono‑
amine biosynthesis in brain. Physiol Rev 63: 484‑546, 1983. 
61.	 Kaufman S: Tyrosine Hydroxylase. In: John Wiley and Sons, 2: 
251. pp103‑220, 1995. 
62.	Nagatsu T, Levitt M and Udenfriend S: Tyrosine hydroxylase. 
The initial step in norepinephrine biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 239: 
2910‑2917, 1964. 
63.	Spector  S, Gordon  R, Sjoerdsma  A and Udenfriend  S: 
End‑product inhibition of tyrosine hydroxylase as a possible 
mechanism for regulation of norepinephrine synthesis. Mol 
Pharmacol 3: 549‑555, 1967. 
64.	Neff NH, Ngai SH, Wang CT and Costa E: Calculation of the 
rate of catecholamine synthesis from the rate of conversion of 
tyrosine‑14C to catecholamines. Effect of adrenal demedullation 
on synthesis rates. Mol Pharmacol 5: 90‑99, 1969.
65.	Iuvone PM, Rauch AL, Marshburn PB, Glass DB and Neff NH: 
Activation of retinal tyrosine hydroxylase in vitro by cyclic 
AMP‑dependent protein kinase: Characterization and compar‑
ison to activation in vivo by photic stimulation. J Neurochem 39: 
1632‑1640, 1982.
66.	Carlsson A and Lindqvist M: Dependence of 5‑HT and catechol‑
amine synthesis on concentrations of precursor amino‑acids in 
rat brain. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 303: 157‑164, 
1978.
67.	 Scally MC, Ulus I and Wurtman RJ: Brain tyrosine level controls 
striatal dopamine synthesis in haloperidol‑treated rats. J Neural 
Transm 41: 1‑6, 1977.
68.	Iuvone PM, Galli CL, Garrison‑Gund CK and Neff NH: Light 
stimulates tyrosine hydroxylase activity and dopamine synthesis 
in retinal amacrine neurons. Science 202: 901‑902, 1978. 
69.	Fernstrom MH, Volk EA, Fernstrom JD and Iuvone PM: Effect 
of tyrosine administration on dopa accumulation in light‑ and 
dark‑adapted retinas from normal and diabetic rats. Life Sci 39: 
2049‑2057, 1986. 
70.	Wurtman RJ, Larin F, Mostafapour S and Fernstrom JD: Brain 
catechol synthesis: Control by train tyrosine concentration. 
Science 185: 183‑184, 1974.
71.	 Carlsson A, Davis JN, Kehr W, Lindqvist M and Atack CV: 
Simultaneous measurement of tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxy‑
lase activities in brain in vivo using an inhibitor of the aromatic 
amino acid decarboxylase. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch 
Pharmacol 275: 153‑168, 1972.
72.	Colzato LS, de Haan AM and Hommel B: Food for creativity: 
Tyrosine promotes deep thinking. Psychol Res 79: 709‑714, 2015.
73.	Abuhamdah  S, Abuhamdah  R, Howes  MJ, Al‑Olimat  S, 
Ennaceur A and Chazot PL: Pharmacological and neuroprotec‑
tive profile of an essential oil derived from leaves of Aloysia 
citrodora Palau. J Pharm Pharmacal 67: 1306‑1315, 2015. 
74.	Ryu IS, Kim OH, Kim JS, Sohn S, Choe ES, Lim RN, Kim TW, 
Seo JW and Jang EY: Effects of β‑Phenylethylamine on psycho‑
motor, rewarding, and reinforcing behaviors and affective state: 
The role of dopamine D1 receptors. Int J Mol Sci 22: 9485, 2021.
75.	 Dourish CT: An observational analysis of the behavioural effects 
of beta‑phenylethylamine in isolated and grouped mice. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 6: 143‑1458, 1982.
76.	MacDonald  A, van  Wegberg  AMJ, Ahring  K, Beblo  S, 
Bélanger‑Quintana  A, Burlina  A, Campistol  J, Coşkun  T, 
Feillet F, Giżewska M, et al: PKU dietary handbook to accom‑
pany PKU guidelines. Orphanet J Rare Dis 15: 171, 2020. 
77.	 van  Wegberg  A MJ, MacDonald  A, A h r ing  K, 
Bélanger‑Quintana A, Blau N, Bosch AM, Burlina A, Campistol J, 
Feillet F, Giżewska M, et al: The complete European guidelines 
on phenylketonuria: Diagnosis and treatment. Orphanet J Rare 
Dis 12: 162, 2017.
78.	Molinoff PB and Axelrod J: Biochemistry of catecholamines. 
Annu Rev Biochem 40: 465‑500, 1971. 
79.	 Weiner N: Tyrosine‑3‑monooxygenase (tyrosine hydroxylase) 
In: Aromatic amino acid hydroxylases and mental disease. John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, New York, pp141‑190, 1979. 
  80.	Tripp  G and Wickens  JR: Neurobiology of ADHD. 
Neuropharmacology 57: 579‑589, 2009. 
  81.	Arnsten AF: Catecholamine regulation of the prefrontal cortex. 
J Psychopharmacol 11: 151‑162, 1997.
  82.	Anisman H and Zacharko RM: Behavioral and neurochemical 
consequences associated with stressors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 467: 
205‑225, 1986. 
  83.	Brooks DJ and Piccini P: Imaging in Parkinson's disease: The 
role of monoamines in behavior. Biol Psychiatry 59: 908‑918, 
2006.
  84.	Weiner N: Regulation of norepinephrine biosynthesis. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol 10: 273‑290, 1970. 
  85.	Cousins DA, Butts K and Young AH: The role of dopamine in 
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord 11: 787‑806, 2009. 
  86.	Koob  GF and Volkow  ND: Neurocircuitry of addiction. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 35: 217‑238, 2010. 
  87.	Døskeland AP and Flatmark T: Ubiquitination of soluble and 
membrane-bound tyrosine hydroxylase and degradation of the 
soluble form. Eur J Biochem 269: 1561‑1569, 2002.
  88.	Harris  WS: Coates PM BJBMR. Omega‑3 fatty acids. In: 
Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd edition. Vol 86. 
London and New York, Informa Healthcare, 2010.
  89.	Shin SS and Dixon CE: Oral fish oil restores striatal dopamine 
release after traumatic brain injury. Neurosci Lett 496: 168‑171, 
2011. 
  90.	Rimm  EB, Appel  LJ, Chiuve  SE, Djoussé  L, Engler  MB, 
Kris‑Etherton  PM, Mozaffarian  D, Siscovick  DS, 
Lichtenstein  AH; American Heart Association Nutrition 
Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic 
Health, et al: Seafood Long‑Chain n‑3 Polyunsaturated Fatty 
Acids and Cardiovascular Disease: A Science Advisory From 
the American Heart Association. Circulation 138: e35‑e47, 2018. 
  91.	Oken  E, Kleinman  KP, Berland  WE, Simon  SR, 
Rich‑Edwards JW and Gillman MW: Decline in fish consump‑
tion among pregnant women after a national mercury advisory. 
Obstet Gynecol 102: 346‑351, 2003. 
  92.	Leaf A: Prevention of sudden cardiac death by n‑3 polyunsatu‑
rated fatty acids. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 8 (Suppl 1): 
S27‑S29, 2007. 
  93.	JH Jones P and Papamandjaris AA: Lipids: Cellular Metabolism. 
In: Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th edition. Wiley, 
pp132‑148, 2012.
  94.	Miller MR, Nichols PD and Carter CG: n‑3 Oil sources for use 
in aquaculture‑alternatives to the unsustainable harvest of wild 
fish. Nutr Res Rev 21: 85‑96, 2008. 
  95.	U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Questions & answers for 
consumers concerning infant formulas, 2015. 
  96.	Mitchell DC, Knight CA, Hockenberry J, Teplansky R and 
Hartman TJ: Beverage caffeine intakes in the U.S. Food Chem 
Toxicol 63: 136‑142, 2014.
  97.	Volkow ND, Tomasi D, Wang GJ, Telang F, Fowler JS, Logan J, 
Benveniste H, Kim R, Thanos PK and Ferré S: Evidence that 
sleep deprivation downregulates dopamine D2R in ventral 
striatum in the human brain. J Neurosci 32: 6711‑6717, 2012. 
  98.	Wisor JP, Nishino S, Sora I, Uhl GH, Mignot E and Edgar DM: 
Dopaminergic role in stimulant‑induced wakefulness. 
J Neurosci 21: 1787‑1794, 2001. 
  99.	Volkow  ND, Wang  G, Fowler  JS, Logan  J, Gerasimov  M, 
Maynard L, Ding Y, Gatley SJ, Gifford A and Franceschi D: 
Therapeutic doses of oral methylphenidate significantly increase 
extracellular dopamine in the human brain. J Neurosci 21: 
RC121, 2001.
100.	Abi‑Dargham  A, Kegeles  LS, Martinez  D, Innis  RB and 
Laruelle M: Dopamine mediation of positive reinforcing effects 
of amphetamine in stimulant naïve healthy volunteers: Results 
from a large cohort. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 13: 459‑468, 
2003.
101.	Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Logan J, Alexoff D, Zhu W, Telang F, 
Wang GJ, Jayne M, Hooker JM, Wong C, et al: Effects of 
modafinil on dopamine and dopamine transporters in the male 
human brain: Clinical implications. JAMA 301: 1148‑1154, 
2009. 
102.	Nguyen  TL, Tian  YH, You  IJ, Lee  SY and Jang  CG: 
Modafinil‑induced conditioned place preference via dopami‑
nergic system in mice. Synapse 65: 733‑741, 2011. 
103.	Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Logan J, Gatley SJ, Wong C, 
Hitzemann R and Pappas NR: Reinforcing effects of psycho‑
stimulants in humans are associated with increases in brain 
dopamine and occupancy of D (2) receptors. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther 291: 409‑415, 1999.

ELSAMANI:  BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS THAT ENHANCE DOPAMINE LEVELS IN THE BRAIN
14
104.	Wuo‑Silva  R, Fukushiro  DF, Borçoi  AR, Fernandes  HA, 
Procópio‑Souza  R, Hollais  AW, Santos  R, Ribeiro  LT, 
Corrêa JM, Talhati F, et al: Addictive potential of modafinil and 
cross‑sensitization with cocaine: A pre‑clinical study. Addict 
Biol 16: 565‑579, 2011. 
105.	Chen  JF, Xu  K, Petzer  JP, Staal  R, Xu  YH, Beilstein  M, 
Sonsalla  PK, Castagnoli  K, Castagnoli  N  Jr and 
Schwarzschild MA: Neuroprotection by caffeine and A(2A) 
adenosine receptor inactivation in a model of Parkinson's 
disease. J Neurosci 21: RC143, 2001. 
106.	El Yacoubi M, Ledent C, Ménard JF, Parmentier M, Costentin J 
and Vaugeois JM: The stimulant effects of caffeine on locomotor 
behavior in mice are mediated through its blockade of adenosine 
A(2A) receptors. Br J Pharmacol 129: 1465‑1473, 2000. 
107.	Huang ZL, Qu WM, Eguchi N, Chen JF, Schwarzschild MA, 
Fredholm BB, Urade Y and Hayaishi O: Adenosine A2A, but 
not A1, receptors mediate the arousal effect of caffeine. Nat 
Neurosci 8: 858‑859, 2005. 
108.	Lazarus M, Shen HY, Cherasse Y, Qu WM, Huang ZL, Bass CE, 
Winsky‑Sommerer R, Semba K, Fredholm BB, Boison D, et al: 
Arousal effect of caffeine depends on adenosine A2A recep‑
tors in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 31: 
10067‑10075, 2011. 
109.	Solinas M, Ferré S, You ZB, Karcz‑Kubicha M, Popoli P and 
Goldberg SR: Caffeine induces dopamine and glutamate release 
in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 22: 6321‑6324, 
2002. 
110.	Zheng X, Takatsu S, Wang H and Hasegawa H: Acute intra‑
peritoneal injection of caffeine improves endurance exercise 
performance in association with increasing brain dopamine 
release during exercise. Pharmacol Biochem Behav  122: 
136‑143, 2014.
111.	Volkow  ND, Wang  GJ, Logan  J, Alexoff  D, Fowler  JS, 
Thanos PK, Wong C, Casado V, Ferre S and Tomasi D: Caffeine 
increases striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor availability in the 
human brain. Transl Psychiatry 5: e549, 2015. 
112.	Heimbach JT, Marone PA, Hunter JM, Nemzer BV, Stanley SM 
and Kennepohl E: Safety studies on products from whole coffee 
fruit. Food Chem Toxicol 48: 2517‑2525, 2010.
113.	Chaturvedi  RK, Shukla  S, Seth  K, Chauhan  S, Sinha  C, 
Shukla Y and Agrawal AK: Neuroprotective and neurorescue 
effect of black tea extract in 6‑hydroxydopamine‑lesioned 
rat model of Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol Dis 22: 421‑434, 
2006.
114.	Alramadhan E, Hanna MS, Hanna MS, Goldstein TG, Avila SM 
and Weeks BS: Dietary and botanical anxiolytics. Med Sci 
Monit 18: RA40‑RA48, 2012. 
115.	Yokogoshi H, Kobayashi M, Mochizuki M and Terashima T: 
Effect of theanine, r‑glutamyl ethyl amide, on brain monoamines 
and striatal dopamine release in conscious rats. Neurochem 
Res 23: 667‑673, 1998. 
116.	Yao J, Shen XN, Shen H and Wu M: Effects of theanine on 
monoamine neurotransmitters and related genes in cerebral 
ischemia‑reperfusion injury rats. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za 
Zhi 46: 635‑639, 2012 (In Chinese).
117.	Lee Y, Moon SJ and Montell C: Multiple gustatory receptors 
required for the caffeine response in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 106: 4495‑500, 2009. 
118.	Wright GA, Baker DD, Palmer MJ, Stabler D, Mustard JA, 
Power EF, Borland AM and Stevenson PC: Caffeine in floral 
nectar enhances a pollinator's memory of reward. Science 339: 
1202‑1204, 2013. 
119.	Fredholm BB, Bättig K, Holmén J, Nehlig A and Zvartau EE: 
Actions of caffeine in the brain with special reference to factors 
that contribute to its widespread use. Pharmacol Rev 51: 83‑133, 
1999. 
120.	Barone JJ and Roberts HR: Caffeine consumption. Food Chem 
Toxicol 34: 119‑129, 1996. 
121.	Mitchell DC, Hockenberry J, Teplansky R and Hartman TJ: 
Assessing dietary exposure to caffeine from beverages in the 
U.S. population using brand‑specific versus category‑specific 
caffeine values. Food Chem Toxicol 80: 247‑252, 2015.
Copyright © 2026 Elsamani. This work is licensed 
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International (CC BY 4.0) License.
