Coffee Brewing: 
Wetting, Hydrolysis & Extraction revisited 
By Emma Bladyka 
 
 
“Brewing can be considered a personal taste adventure.” – Michael Sivetz, in Coffee Technology 
 
 
Brewing is one of the most complex yet under-researched topics in coffee. The literature 
is sparse, much of the science is ancient, and our industry assumptions have been vast. In our 
SCAA education, we have always stressed the three “stages” of brewing to be wetting, 
extraction, and hydrolysis (Lingle 2011). These terms have always seemed simple, vague, and 
mildly scientific, but have not yet been well defined and often leave us with more questions 
than answers. Of course, we all know anecdotally and theoretically how complicated coffee 
extraction is as a process, because we have been continually learning about it since our 
initiation into coffee. I will preface this article by stating that, as we do not have all the answers, 
there is much to learn! 
 
Wetting: 
For coffee to be brewed it must first be wetted, which means the coffee grounds must 
absorb water. This is a physical process which can be explained via many simple yet interacting 
variables. First, we must consider that coffee is ground into a distribution of particle sizes. The 
size of the grounds, their density and placement/distribution in the bed of coffee, and the 
method of water addition will all influence the speed of wetting. Certainly, if any external 
agitation occurs during the wetting phase, this will influence the speed and evenness of the 
process. We can think of the coffee bed as similar to a soil, where the rate of water infiltration 
depends on particle size and shape (e.g. gravel vs. sand), the initial moisture content of the 
particles, porosity, gas solubility, pressure, and particle swelling (Hillel 2004).  
Coffee grounds, during wetting, swell and after the brewing is complete retain a 
proportion of the water dispensed onto them, depending on particle size (Sivetz and Desrosier 
1979; Mateus and others 2007; Cammenga and others 1997). As air, volatile compounds, and 
other gases (primarily carbon dioxide) are displaced during this wetting, we might notice an 
effervescence, or coffee “blooming” associated with it (Clarke and Macrae 1985). A portion of 
these gases can also be dissolved into the water or the coffee slurry. In certain brew methods, 
we can think of the wetting period as responsible for the “bloom” of the coffee. In other brew 
methods, such as those in the immersion category, the wetting phase of brewing may take 
place very quickly. In espresso, certain machine manufacturers have included a “pre-infusion” 
to allow the coffee bed to be wetted prior to the main extraction event.  
As coffee technicians and professionals, we usually like our coffee bed to be wetted in a 
uniform manner, so that later the coffee can be extracted in a regular flow and time, but the 
best baristas know that this to be an impossible task. Ideally, if we believe that the best coffee 
flavor comes from evenly wet and extracted coffee particles, we try and minimize the deviation 
in grind size and wetting time. However, the jury is still out on the merits or drawbacks of a 
normal grind particle distribution! As with all coffee brewing – it is a matter of personal 
preference. 

 
Extraction: 
As the coffee grounds are wet, gases and volatile compounds are dissolved and lost, and 
soluble compounds are simultaneously drawn out from the coffee. This primarily occurs as 
chemical and physical reactions between the coffee and the water, and we call it extraction. 
Really, the term can be used in this context interchangeably with brewing, as the extraction 
process makes up the nuts & bolts of coffee brewing. Chemical engineers might call it 
“leaching” or “percolation” (Clarke 1987; Petracco 2001). When chemists speak of extraction 
they are referring to the specific separation of a particular substance from a mixture (or whole 
product). In our case, we are separating many important soluble solids from a ground coffee 
product. When a product is brought into contact with a solvent, some components of that 
product behave as soluble and others as insoluble. In brewing, ground coffee is our product and 
water is the “universal” solvent. In truth, without extraction, we would forever just have coffee 
grounds in water. It turns out, the term “extraction” that we use today refers to a few different 
types of reactions that are acting to transfer coffee solubles from coffee to water over time to 
create our coffee beverage. Currently, the method the coffee industry has to quantify 
extraction is as the percentage of solubles yield (aka brewing yield) from the amount of coffee 
grounds used to prepare the brew (Lingle 2011; Petracco 2001; Clarke 1987).  This has generally 
been agreed upon to be ideal between 18-22% (Sivetz and Desrosier 1979; Lockhart 1957). 
Anything under or over that has been characterized, from a sensory standpoint, by low 
extraction yields exhibiting a sour, sweet flavor and high extraction yields with bitter, astringent 
flavors, respectively (Petracco 2001; Rao 2010). 
Soluble compounds can exit the coffee grounds through a few different types of chemical 
reactions, all dependent on temperature, time, and agitation. In fact, they may go through 
more than one of the below processes. The chemical reactions which occur during coffee 
extraction are: 
• Dissolution Processes: Water solubility of compounds allows them to be dissolved 
into the water and hence extracted into the coffee beverage. Examples include 
chlorogenic, acetic, malic, and other acids, caffeine and trigonelline (Arya and Rao 
2007). There are two types of dissolution, named molecular and ionic for their 
mechanism. Compounds such as salts and acids usually dissolve ionically, as opposed 
to caffeine, which dissolves molecularly. This Dissolution of water soluble 
compounds happens naturally when water moves over the coffee grounds during 
brewing. 
• Hydrolysis: Hydrolysis is the name for a general chemical reaction that occurs when 
water reacts with another compound to alter it or break it down. During extraction, 
insoluble or large soluble coffee compounds can be ‘loosened’ from the coffee 
particles via hydrolysis reactions (Cammenga and others 1997). This is one type of 
reaction that contributes to the extraction from coffee of solubles, typically larger 
organic acids. There is some debate as to how important this particular reaction is to 
coffee brewing (Clarke 1987; Thaler 1979). When compounds go through hydrolysis 
go through the process of being ‘hydrolyzed’. 
• Diffusion Processes: Wherever solutes are not distributed uniformly throughout a 
solution, this creates a concentration gradient. Consequently, solutes diffuse from 

zones of high concentration to where it is lower. In coffee, this means areas of high 
coffee concentrations (the grounds) to areas of low coffee concentration (the 
water). An important particular case where these concentration gradients result in 
the diffusion of compounds is called osmosis. Osmosis is the net movement of 
solvent molecules through a membrane (in this case, a cell wall) into a region of 
lower solute concentration. This occurs in order to equalize the solute 
concentrations on both sides of the “membrane” (the cell wall). This movement of 
molecules via diffusion does not require stirring and would occur even without the 
active motion of gravity washing the water over the coffee or other agitation. 
Diffusion can be calculated based on Fick’s Law, which states that diffusion is a 
function of time, temperature, liquid viscosity, layer depth, and solute concentration 
in both the liquid and the solid, among other factors. Fick’s Law is fully described in 
the “Percolation” chapter of Illy & Viani (Petracco 2005b).   
 
Important Considerations:  
• Order of Reactions: What is important about the above ways by which soluble solids can 
be extracted from coffee into water is that more than one of these forces can AND WILL 
be working simultaneously. As soon as an individual coffee particle is wetted and more 
water moves over its surface, it is going to start the extraction process. This means that 
each individual coffee particle will have its own brew time. The solute concentration of 
the liquid (coffee) that is passing over coffee grounds will change as it flows through the 
coffee bed, therefore changing the diffusion rate via Fick’s Law. Finally, don’t forget that 
the brewed coffee itself will be going through many chemical reactions during the 
brewing process, even after it has gone through a filtration medium and fallen into its 
brew reservoir. 
• Temperature: Heat is a key factor influencing coffee extraction, which has not been 
addressed fully in the above explanation. Generally, as brewing temperature increases, 
coffee extraction (total and rate) increases (Merritt and Proctor 1959; Rao 2010). When 
compounds are broken down due to heat, it is called thermal degradation, this process 
largely occurs during roasting. We brew coffee with hot water (generally agreed to be 
ideal between 195 and 205°F), and we know that heat accelerates all chemical 
reactions, as demonstrated by the Arrhenius equation (Petracco 2005b). Heat also is 
known to increase the solubility of many chemical compounds. Thus, heat can work in 
the two ways simultaneously to affect coffee extraction; acceleration of chemical 
reactions, and by increasing the solubility of certain compounds. 
On the other side of the coin, when we brew coffee at room or refrigerated 
temperatures, we must extend the brew time in order to get the “same” extraction, 
numbers-wise. Where the cold brew process lacks in temperature, it makes up for in 
time. Coffee solubles display significantly decreased solubility in room temperature 
water. Increasing the brew time to hours instead of minutes allows for maximal 
extraction of the solubles from the coffee grounds. That being said, we must note that 
the two final beverages (hot and cold brewed) are not expected to exhibit the same 
chemical composition. 

There is much anecdotal and some scientific evidence that too much heat 
(temperatures above 205°F) result in the extraction of bitter and astringent compounds, 
reducing the likeability of the brewed coffee (Merritt and Proctor 1959; Andueza and 
others 2003; Sivetz and Desrosier 1979; Petracco 2001). In particular, the sensory 
perception of bitterness and astringency of coffee has been found to increase with 
brewing temperature (Andueza and others 2003). Of course, in reality temperature is 
not able to be examined as a single variable in the coffee brewing process, thus making 
it difficult to study. 
 
• Other 
o Brewing Method: Certain brewing methods transport additional components 
(not only coffee solubles) of the ground coffee to the final beverage. A simple 
example is Turkish coffee, where suspended solid particles (spent grounds) keep 
swimming in the final beverage. Another case is espresso: an instance (probably 
the only one) where along with soluble material there is presence of an all-
important fraction of coffee oil, forming an emulsion (Petracco 2005a). However, 
the above lesson did not describe the intricacies of these methods. 
Water Chemistry: We are aware that certain aspects of water chemistry may 
affect the extraction of coffee components. Some of the foundational research 
on this topic has been established for decades (Lockhart and others 1955; 
Campbell and others 1958; Pangborn and others 1971; Beeman and others 2011; 
Lingle 2011). This work tended to focus on impurities, off-flavors, and holistic 
measurements of calcium and other dissolved solids. However, more recent 
research is beginning to shed light on the impact specific cations (calcium, 
magnesium, or potassium) in water have on the extraction of different coffee 
constituents (Hendon and others 2014). 
o Time (interacting with temperature) will certainly influence the amount of and 
type and amount of compounds extracted from coffee (Lee and others 1992).  
There is only very basic evidence of specific types of compounds in the coffee 
extract being reliably dependent on time (Merritt and Proctor 1959). Ultimately, 
this is another variable in brewing coffee which can never be separated from the 
other linked factors. 
o Coffee grind: In fact, it is practically impossible to extract soluble solids from 
coffee without grinding it. Of course, the finer the grind, the smaller the particle 
size, the greater the surface area and therefore additional contact between 
coffee grounds and water (Clarke 1987). The grind size and shape thus is 
correlated with pore space of the coffee bed. The coffee grind has also been 
found to influence the rate of caffeine extraction (Spiro and Selwood 1984).  
o Agitation/Turbulence: Finally, if any turbulence/agitation occurs, including but 
not limited to the movement of water through the coffee grounds, this will 
influence extraction. Certainly if the rate of flow around coffee grounds is 
increased, this will lead to a higher rate of extraction.  
o Coffee Quality: Certainly brewing method and coffee extraction can influence 
the hedonic evaluation of a coffee beverage. However, we have to admit that we 

cannot make a defective, low quality coffee taste like a beautiful, high quality 
coffee via the brewing process. All processing and handling, freshness, flavor 
quality, and unique and favorable flavor characteristics can only be allowed to 
shine or be destroyed during brewing. The heavy burden in this final step lies 
with the barista, and thus the role of extraction is the final act in the glorious 
opera that is the coffee chain. 
 
What is leftover? 
There are certain large molecules which are not extracted from the coffee. This could be 
for a few reasons. First, the compounds might not be soluble in water. These compounds would 
be what we call “water insoluble”. We generally consider a compound not soluble nor 
hydrolysable because of their chemical structure, orientation or size. We know these insoluble 
compounds to include macro components of the coffee cell walls, which survive the roasting 
process (Petracco 2005b). These are polysaccharides such as cellulose and hemicellulose, and 
other polymers such as lignin (Arya and Rao 2007; Redgwell and others 2002; Fischer and 
others 2001). Hemicellulose is composed of three sugars, mannose being the most abundant, 
followed by galactose and arabinose, which are all found in the coffee cell wall (Mussatto and 
others 2011; Passos and others 2014). However, if these larger molecule are not hydrolyzed 
during a long, hot coffee extraction, they are often left over. Larger molecules, such as proteins 
or those deriving from protein degradation can be left in the coffee grounds. For example, high 
molecular weight melanoidins largely remain in the spent coffee bed, while smaller 
melanoidins, grouped under the definition “soluble fibers,” are important to the brew inasmuch 
as they provide color and possibly taste and texture (Bekedam and others 2006; Bekedam and 
others 2008). Some ash and corresponding minerals are also not extracted into the coffee 
brew, such as potassium (when not as salts), phosphorus, and magnesium, among others 
(Mussatto and others 2011). 
 
Acknowledgements 
Special thanks to Dr. Marino Petracco for his mentorship on this subject. 
 
Literature Cited 
 
Andueza S, Maeztu L, Pascual L, Ibáñez C, de Peña MP, Cid C. 2003. Influence of extraction 
temperature on the final quality of espresso coffee. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture 83(3):240-8. 
Arya M, Rao LJM. 2007. An Impression of Coffee Carbohydrates. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition 47(1):51-67. 
Beeman D, Songer P, Lingle T. 2011. Water Quality Handbook, 2nd ed. Long Beach, CA: 
Specialty Coffee Assocation of America. 
Bekedam EK, Roos E, Schols HA, Van Boekel MAJS, Smit G. 2008. Low Molecular Weight 
Melanoidins in Coffee Brew. J. Agric. Food Chem. 56(11):4060-7. 
Bekedam EK, Schols HA, van Boekel MAJS, Smit G. 2006. High Molecular Weight Melanoidins 
from Coffee Brew. J. Agric. Food Chem. 54(20):7658-66. 

Cammenga HK, Eggers R, Hinz T, Steer A, Waldmann C. 1997. Extraction in Coffee Processing 
and Brewing. Proc. 17th ASIC. Nairobi. 
Campbell CL, Dawes RK, Deolalkar S, Merritt MC. 1958. Effect of Certain Chemicals in Water on 
the Flavor of Brewed Coffee. J. Food Sci. 23(6):575-7. 
Clarke RJ. 1987. Extraction. In: Clarke RJ, Macrae R, editors. Coffee: Volume 2: Technology. New 
York, NY: Elsevier Science Publishing Co., INC. p. 109-45. 
Clarke RJ, Macrae R. 1985. Coffee: Volume 1: Chemistry. New York, NY: Elsevier Applied Science 
LTF. 
Fischer M, Reimann S, Trovato V, Redgwell RJ. 2001. Polysaccharides of green Arabica and 
Robusta coffee beans. Carbohydrate Research 330(1):93-101. 
Hendon CH, Colonna-Dashwood L, Colonna-Dashwood M. 2014. The Role of Dissolved Cations 
in Coffee Extraction. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62(21):4947-50. 
Hillel D. 2004. Introduction to Environmental Soil Physics. USA: Elsevier Academic Press. 
Lee TA, Kempthorne R, Hardy JK. 1992. Compositional Changes in Brewed Coffee as a Function 
of Brewing Time. J. Food Sci. 57(6):1417-9. 
Lingle TR. 2011. The Coffee Brewing Handbook, 2nd Edition ed. Long Beach, CA: Specality 
Coffee Association of America. 
Lockhart E, E. 1957. The Soluble Solids in Beverage Coffee as an Index of Cup Quality. New York, 
NY: Coffee Brewing Institute, Inc. 
Lockhart EE, Tucker CL, Merritt MC. 1955. The Effect of Water Impurities on the Flavor of 
Brewed Coffee. J. Food Sci. 20(6):598-605. 
Mateus M-L, Rouvet M, Gumy J-C, Liardon R. 2007. Interactions of Water with Roasted and 
Ground Coffee in the Wetting Process Investigated by a Combination of Physical 
Determinations. J. Agric. Food Chem. 55(8):2979-84. 
Merritt MC, Proctor BE. 1959. Extraction Rates for Selected Components in Coffee Brew. J. Food 
Sci. 24(6):735-43. 
Mussatto SI, Carneiro LM, Silva JPA, Roberto IC, Teixeira JA. 2011. A study on chemical 
constituents and sugars extraction from spent coffee grounds. Carbohydrate Polymers 
83(2):368-74. 
Pangborn RM, Trabue IM, Little AC. 1971. Analysis of Coffee, Tea and Artificially Flavored Drinks 
Prepared from Mineralized Waters. J. Food Sci. 36(2):355-62. 
Passos CP, Moreira ASP, Domingues MRM, Evtuguin DV, Coimbra MA. 2014. Sequential 
microwave superheated water extraction of mannans from spent coffee grounds. 
Carbohydrate Polymers 103(0):333-8. 
Petracco M. 2001. Technology IV: Beverage Preparation: Brewing Trends for the New 
Millennium. In: Clarke RJ, VItzthum OG, editors. Coffee: Recent Developments. Ames, 
Iowa: Iowa State Univeristy Press/Blackwell Science. p. 140-64. 
Petracco M. 2005a. Our Everyday Cup of Coffee: The Chemistry Behind the Magic. Journal of 
Chemical Education 82(8):1161-7. 
Petracco M. 2005b. Percolation. In: Illy A, Viani R, editors. Espresso Coffee: The Science of 
Quality. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. 
Rao S. 2010. Everything but Espresso: Professional Coffee Brewing Techniques. Canada. 

Redgwell RJ, Trovato V, Curti D, Fischer M. 2002. Effect of roasting on degradation and 
structural features of polysaccharides in Arabica coffee beans. Carbohydrate Research 
337(5):421-31. 
Sivetz M, Desrosier NW. 1979. Coffee Technology. Westport, CT: The Avi Publishing Company, 
Inc. 
Spiro M, Selwood RM. 1984. The kinetics and mechanism of caffeine infusion from coffee: The 
effect of particle size. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 35(8):915-24. 
Thaler H. 1979. The chemistry of coffee extraction in relation to polysaccharides. Food 
Chemistry 4(1):13-22. 
 
 
