WISCONSIN FOOD PROCESSING AND 
FOOD SALES REQUIREMENTS
FOOD SAFETY & LICENSING GUIDE
Wisconsin Department of 
Agriculture, Trade and 
Consumer Protection
Division of Food and 
Recreational Safety

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 4 
Why is a license required?
Page 5 
Do I need a license?
Page 6 
What is the application process?
Page 7 
Key requirements for licensing:  Physical 
Facility, Toxic Materials, & Toilets
Page 8  Key requirements for licensing:  Equipment, 
Utensils & Linens
Page 9  Key requirements for licensing:  Water, 
Plumbing & Waste
Page 10  Key requirements for licensing:  Food
Page 11  Key requirements for licensing:  Personnel
Page 12 Resources
Back
Contact Information
dfs_fs_090

WHY IS A LICENSE REQUIRED?
The objective of food licensing and inspection is to keep food wholesome and safe.  Ensuring a 
safe food supply protects public health, minimizes your liability, and instills customer satisfaction.  
The responsibility of the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection is to ensure 
that all consumers who “pay” for a food product receive one that is safe and wholesome.   Our 
role is to ensure that foods made and sold in Wisconsin meet applicable state and federal food 
safety regulatory standards. 
This booklet is a resource to guide you through the licensing process, explain the requirements 
and ensure you have done your research before pursuing your application. 
About
1
16
6
in
or 48 million people 
get sick each year from 
contaminated food. 
[Page 4]

DO I NEED A LICENSE?
A retail food license or food processing plant license is required to make and sell food items to 
the public.   
If you plan to sell your products primarily to consumers directly, you will need a retail food 
license.  Internet sales are considered retail sales.  
If you plan to sell primarily through wholesale distribution, you will need a food processing 
plant license issued by our Department.  Wholesaling under a food processing plant license 
allows you to sell your products anywhere and to anyone; this includes other retail food stores, 
restaurants and the internet.  
There are certain types of foods - specifically canned items and processed fish - that can only 
be made in a facility licensed as a food processing plant.   
[Page 5]

WHAT IS THE APPLICATION PROCESS?
• Learn what type of license(s) 
needed
• Call our licensing specialists 
at 608-224-4923 or e-mail 
us at 
datcpdfslicensing@wi.gov. 
Know the 
requirements
• License application and fees
• Plan reviews, if required. 
• Licensing inspection
• Call our licensing specialists 
at 608-224-4923 or e-mail 
us at 
datcpdfslicensing@wi.gov. 
Get your license(s) 
and register with 
FDA if applicable.
• Know the rules. 
• Periodic on-site inspections
• In-house mandatory food 
safety systems, as applicable
• Record-keeping, as 
applicable
Operate your 
business
[Page 6]

KEY REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING:  
PHYSICAL FACILITY, TOXIC MATERIALS, & TOILETS
Ensure that the location is acceptable to your local zoning board, and obtain a seller’s permit from your local city clerk’s 
office, if required.  
The facility must be a commercial-grade kitchen.  Using your personal home kitchen is not allowed.  If you plan to start the 
business in your home, you must construct a separate kitchen room dedicated to your food business.  The dedicated kitchen 
must have washable floors, walls, and ceilings.  The lighting must be adequate for commercial purposes, and the room must 
be properly ventilated.  Some starting operators rent time in a restaurant, school, or church kitchen to satisfy the separate
commercial kitchen requirement without having to invest in a new separate kitchen of their own.
The exterior of the premises must be drained, clean, orderly and free from garbage accumulation or harborage areas for 
rodents or other pests.
Ventilation, natural or mechanical, must be adequate to remove excess heat, condensation, smoke or fumes, and odors.  Be 
sure to check with a local fire inspector for specific requirements. 
Walls and ceiling must be smooth, non-absorbent and finished with a light-colored, easily cleanable surface.
The floors must be smooth, non-absorbent and in good repair.  Wood-surfaced floors are not acceptable for most food 
processing facilities.
Processing areas, equipment, and utensils must be thoroughly cleaned immediately after the day’s processing or more often 
as required.
Lighting must be sufficient for the intended purpose.  Light bulbs or fluorescent tubes must be shielded or shatter-resistant to 
prevent contamination of food in the event of bulb breakage.
Effective measures to control the presence of insects, rodents, and other pests must be employed.
Poisonous and hazardous substances must be used with caution and in strict accordance with label instructions.  They must be 
kept in segregated storage, adequate to prevent contamination of food or utensils.
[Page 7]

KEY REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING:  
EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS & LINENS
Hand washing facilities must include a non-hand-operated hand-washing sink located in the processing area.  This 
sink may not be used for food preparation.  Hand soap, paper towels in a dispenser, and an easily cleanable 
waste container are required.  Common towels, those used by more than one person, cannot be used.
A three-compartment sink or a National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) approved dishwasher is required for washing 
your equipment and utensils daily.  The three compartments are required for the wash, rinse, and sanitize steps.  
There may be a fourth sink for pre-rinsing and/or a food processing sink as required.  The sink must be smooth, 
non-absorbent, and have rounded corners.  Sink compartments must be large enough to accommodate immersion of 
the largest equipment and utensils such that adequate cleaning and sanitizing can be done.
Equipment such as refrigerators, stoves, sinks, and mixers must be of approved design, used only for the food 
business, and be easily cleanable and in good repair.  If the equipment bears the National Sanitation Foundation 
(NSF) certification you can feel certain that it will meet these design requirements.
Tables, counters and other work surfaces must be in good repair and easily cleanable.  Easily cleanable means a 
smooth and non-porous surface in light finishes as much as possible. 
Other utensils like pans, bowls, and spoons must be smooth, non-absorbent, in good condition and easily cleanable.  
Just about all utensils manufactured currently meet these requirements.
An approved sanitizer (such as plain, unscented chlorine bleach) or an equivalent must be provided.  Sanitizer test 
strips, or another approved method, must be available to check the strength of the sanitizing solution. 
[Page 8]

KEY REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING:  
WATER, PLUMBING & WASTE
If you have a private water supply, annual testing for bacterial contamination is required.  
You will need a certified lab safe well water result prior to licensing. 
Plumbing must meet all state and local codes and be in good working order. Contact your 
local plumbing inspector for assistance.
Restrooms must be provided as required by the code of the Safety and Building Division of 
the Department of Safety and Professional Services.  
Toilet rooms may not open directly into processing areas and must be vented to the outside.  
A hand washing sink must be provided inside or immediately adjacent to the restroom.  
A covered trash container must also be provided for ladies’ room and wash hands signage 
must be posted.
[Page 9]

KEY REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING:  FOOD
Food storage must be sanitary, orderly, and protect the food from contamination at all times.  
Food must always be stored at safe temperatures:  refrigeration must be maintained at 41°F 
or below.
All food ingredients, including eggs, must originate from a licensed processing facility.  
Your product’s food label must meet all food-labeling requirements, including an allergen 
alert.
If you are selling products by weight, your scales must be inspected by State Consumer 
Protection personnel or by local weights and measures officials.
A food processing plant operator must have a written plan for identifying and recalling food 
produced at that plant, should a food recall become necessary. The operator must update 
the plan as necessary, and make it available to the department for inspection and copying 
upon request.
[Page 10]

KEY REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING:  PERSONNEL
Employees must wear clean clothing, an effective hair restraint, and no jewelry.  The only 
exception is a plain band wedding ring.
Persons with a communicable disease or open sores may not work where they could 
potentially contaminate the food or food-contact surfaces.
Direct bare-hand contact with ready-to-eat foods is prohibited. 
Food, beverage, and tobacco use is restricted to designated areas, away from the 
processing areas and dishwashing areas.
[Page 11]

RESOURCES
Wholesale Food Processing: Wisconsin Legislature: Chapter ATCP 70
UW Extension Small Scale Production of Acidified Foods: 
http://www.foodsafety.wisc.edu/ssp_acidified_canned_food.html
Retail Food Sales: Wisconsin Legislature: Chapter ATCP 75
The WI Food Code (retail sales):Wisconsin Legislature: Chapter ATCP 75 Appendix
Food Code Fact Sheets: https://datcp.wi.gov/Pages/Programs_Services/FoodCode.aspx
FDA Facility Registration: All food 
facilities, except for retail food 
establishments, must register with FDA, 
and re-register every two years.  You 
can complete this registration online: 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/Guidance
Regulation/FoodFacilityRegistration/d
efault.htm
You may also request paper forms by 
phone, at 1-800-216-7331 or 301-
575-0156. 
Registration was first required by the 
Bioterrorism Act of 2002.
[Page 12]

CONTACT US
CONTACT US
For additional information or to submit your 
application, contact:
Licensing Assistance
608-224-4923
datcpdfslicensing@wisconsin.gov
Application/Payment
Wisconsin DATCP
Division of Food and Recreational Safety 
PO Box 93586 
Milwaukee, WI  53293-0586
dfs_fs_090
