64 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
Human Organization, Vol. 78, No. 1, 2019
Copyright © 2019 by the Society for Applied Anthropology
0018-7259/19/010064-11
Introduction
C
offee remains one of the main tradable goods in Latin 
America and historically has played an important role 
in the development of many countries in the region, 
including Colombia where it has shaped the economic, social, 
and cultural configuration of the country in critical ways. 
Although coffee went from occupying 60 percent of total 
exports in the 1970s to only 5 percent in the last decade (as 
oil, coal, gold, and other minerals began to play a leading 
role in exports), 26 percent of agricultural employment and 
33 percent of the rural population still depend on this crop 
for survival (Bernal 2016). 
Coffee production in Colombia, as is the case in most 
Latin American countries, relies on small-scale coffee pro­
ducers. Ninety-six percent of the members of the National 
Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC) in Colombia belong 
to “la familia cafetera” (the coffee producing-family), 
cultivating fewer than five hectares and depending heav­
ily on family labor. Traditionally, the division of labor in 
the coffee producing households was structured around 
Javier A. Pineda is a Professor at the Interdisciplinary Center for 
Development Studies at Universidad de Los Andes. Maricel Piniero is 
a researcher with Agrosavia—Corporacion Colombiana de Investiga­
cion Agropecuaria. Anayatzin Ramírez is a Professor in the Escuela de 
Estudios Superiores (ENES), Campus Morelia, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México. This article is the result of a research project 
entitled “Improving the Capacity to Act on Gender Equality in Colom­
bia: A Fresh Look at the Coffee Export Sector,” which was funded by 
the Government of Canada (Canada-Americas Trade-related Techni­
cal Assistance Fund/CATRA) between 2014 and 2015. We are very 
grateful to Pablo Heidrich and Barbara MacLaren, staff coordinators 
of the project in the North-South Institute. Finally, the authors thank 
the anonymous reviewers and the editor, Sarah Lyon, for their helpful 
feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript.
Coffee Production and Women’s
Empowerment in Colombia
Javier A. Pineda, Maricel Piniero, and Anayatzin Ramírez
This article analyzes the little understood gendered relations and issues related to women’s empowerment in Colombian family 
coffee farms. We used multiple qualitative methods of inquiry to assess women coffee producers’ empowerment and agency 
within both economic and political spheres. Despite their traditional participation in domestic work and their subordinate 
position in coffee production, we demonstrate that a significant percentage of women coffee producers have been empowered 
through participation in state-funded coffee renovation and specialty coffee certification programs. 
Key words: coffee, empowerment, women’s agency, gender, agriculture, Colombia
complementarity of roles (between men and women), con­
cealing gender power dynamics, but nonetheless serving to 
consolidate a model of family and agricultural production 
in rural regions.
Changes in international markets, especially with the 
emergence of certification processes related to the production 
of specialty coffees, and transformations in the political, so­
cial, and cultural climate of the Colombian countryside, have 
recently made visible the work and the participation of women 
in coffee production. This increased visibility of women does 
not focus so much on their traditional “complementary” work 
in the coffee farm unit but more on the recognition of women 
as producers and owners of coffee, which gives them full 
economic and political rights within the industry. 
This article contributes to two discussions in the 
academic literature that have emerged in recent decades. On 
the one hand, a very large body of literature has discussed 
women’s empowerment, including its meanings, contexts, 
and processes (Ibrahim and Alkire 2007; Kabeer 1994, 1999, 
2005; Rowlands 1997). However, efforts for assessing and 
evaluating the women’s empowerment and advancement (in 
addition to that of other marginalized groups) continue to be 
very limited, particularly within Latin American and other 
developing countries (Narayan 2005; Santillán et al. 2004; 
Schuller and Rottach 2010). On the other hand, an increasing 
body of scholarly research investigates the effectiveness of 
specialty coffee certifications, both broadly and specifically in 
relation to gender equality. Several studies have shown that, 
regardless of the prioritization of gender equality established 
in these programs, they remain insignificant because women 
have limited participation in the productive associations and 
certification programs that try to alter the existing power rela­
tions in agricultural sectors of Latin America (Bacon 2010; 
Lyon 2007, 2008; Lyon et al. 2017; Murray, Raynolds, and 
Taylor 2006).

 65
VOL. 78, NO. 1, SPRING  2019
The objective of this article is to understand women’s 
empowerment in southwest Colombia in the context of coffee 
renovation and certification programs. We build on Kabeer 
(1999) to define empowerment as the ability of people to 
make strategic life decisions in a context where this ability 
was previously denied to them. Specifically, we explore how 
during the recovery from the 2009 coffee production crisis, a 
significant percentage of women managed to obtain a coffee 
producer identification card (cédula cafetera), an instrument 
developed by the FNC through which coffee producers can 
gain access to credit, receive payments and subsidies, and 
vote in FNC elections. The research assessed women coffee 
producers’ level of empowerment and agency using twenty-
four analytical categories along economic, social, and political 
axes. Given their traditional participation in domestic work 
and their subordinate position in coffee production, we argue 
that a growing percentage of women coffee producers have 
succeeded in advancing in a process of empowerment. 
In the first part of this article, background information 
to contextualize the role of women in the coffee industry 
and describe the processes in which they participate is pre­
sented. Subsequently, we describe our research design and 
methods, followed by an analysis of our findings organized 
through the various categories related to gender relations 
in the Colombian coffee industry. Finally, some challenges 
for this empowerment process in the future are identified, 
especially those related to strengthening the organizations 
of women producers. 
Our findings are relevant for countries in Latin America 
and others in the global South, as they demonstrate that it is 
possible to promote gender equity in agricultural production 
through public-sector interventions. Opening opportunities 
for the exercise of women’s own agency, through their deci­
sion making and access to technical and productive resources 
shows that it is possible to make changes in the predominant 
gender norms. This research also contributes to existing 
scholarship by operationalizing empowerment as a useful 
concept for the analysis and assessment of changes in gender 
relations, specifically for coffee production and agricultural 
sustainability programs. Our findings highlight the need to 
strengthen female associativity as a central mechanism for the 
exercise of collective agency and empowerment. Finally, we 
argue that efforts to make coffee production more sustainable 
should not rely on the intensification of women’s work, as is 
currently happening. If we want to advance gender equity, it 
is necessary to develop programs that alter the sexual divi­
sion of labor, facilitate the incorporation of men in unpaid 
domestic work, and provide mechanisms for the socialization 
of domestic care work from the State and society.
Renovation of Coffee Plantations and 
Increased Visibility of Women Coffee Farmers
Between 1870 and 1930, one-fifth of the Colombian 
small farmer population was devoted to coffee production. 
The successful agro-export orientation of the national 
economy resulted from Colombia’s excellent land, good 
weather, growing agricultural population, and family labor 
that employed women and children. Historically, women’s 
labor filled a central role in Colombia’s coffee production: 
providing food for migrant workers during harvest time, main­
taining subsistence crops in home gardens, tending domestic 
animals, undertaking all the household chores, and caring for 
family members. Women were also directly responsible for 
aspects of coffee production itself, particularly manual har­
vesting and grain processing (e.g., coffee cherry processing, 
pulping, and drying, among others) (Ramírez Bacca 2015; 
Rodríguez Giraldo 2009).
According to the 1970 coffee census, there were 302,000 
coffee farms planted on 1 million hectares with 3.5 million 
people associated with its cultivation. In recent decades, 
the Colombian coffee landscape has been very dynamic. 
Changes include an increasing use of technical applications, 
a relative decrease of overall cultivated land area, a greater 
number of farms, and increased production in municipalities 
in the southwest of the country (Guhl 2008). However, it is 
important to note that women’s labor remained central to the 
Colombian coffee sector despite these changes.1 In fact, the 
growing number of farms (from 302,000 in 1970 to 668,000 
in 1997) and their smaller size made the work of coffee farm­
ing more dependent on small family properties rather than on 
large farms, with a greater incorporation of women’s work 
(García 2003). 
Between 2008 and 2009, Colombia’s coffee production 
dropped dramatically (32%) from 11.5 to 7.8 million sacks 
(60 kilos each) due to various reasons including poor weather, 
pests, increased price of fertilizers, and aging coffee planta­
tions (FNC 2013). This production crisis led to the National 
Government and FNC’s renovation programs (both of which 
offered highly subsidized, low-interest loans), known as the 
Permanence, Sustainability, and Future (PSF) and Competiv­
ity programs (Silva Restrepo 2012).2 Because of these coffee 
renovation programs, in 2011 69 percent of coffee plantations 
in Colombia were replanted with coffee seedlings.
By 2011, 96 percent of coffee growers had fewer than 
five hectares planted in coffee, and these small farmers ac­
counted for 71 percent of the national production. The FNC 
recorded 580,000 coffee producers whose families were 
composed of 2.8 million people (33% of Colombia’s rural 
population); the sector generated more than an estimated 
700,000 direct jobs and 1.4 million indirect jobs (Bernal 
2016). In 2015, the registered coffee production reached 
13.5 million sacks, making Colombia the world’s leading 
producer of mild Arabica coffee (and third largest producer 
of coffee, including Robusta varieties). The growth of cof­
fee production between 2010 and 2015 was the result of the 
FNC renovation programs begun in 2009, which resulted 
in the renovation, or replanting, of more than 3,400 million 
coffee trees. The renovation program aimed to replace old 
coffee trees, whose production declines significantly after 
eight years, and those varieties that are most susceptible to 
coffee rust (e.g., Caturra, Borbon, and others) with new 

66 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
coffee resistant varieties (such as Colombia and Castilla). 
As a result, the national average productivity levels rose 
from 13 to 15.3 sacks per hectare. 
In 2014, the departments located in the southwestern part 
of the country, Cauca, Huila, and Nariño, were considered 
the new coffee axis of Colombia due to their rapid growth in 
coffee production in recent decades. This region had 222,000 
coffee growers, comprising 38 percent of total coffee produc­
ers and 40.7 percent of women coffee producers. In terms of 
cultivated hectares, the region accounted for 29.3 percent of 
the total national production of which 24 percent was man­
aged by women.3
The renovation programs, higher productivity, and bean 
quality contributed to the fact that today 51 percent of Colom­
bian coffee exports are classified as specialty coffee and/or 
are certified through various sustainability programs (in other 
words, 51% of the coffee has some degree of added value) 
(FNC 2013) established by organizations such as Nespresso, 
4C, Starbucks, Rainforest Alliance, UTZ, or Fair Trade. 
Many coffee producers in the departments that were visited 
during the research (Cauca, Huila, and Nariño) are pioneers 
in actively participating in these production protocols and 
export certified coffees through cooperatives or other forms 
of associations. 
The PSF program provides incentives and credit to small 
farmers, who cultivate coffee on plots between 0.2 and 5 
hectares, for the renovation of coffee stocks. The Competiv­
ity program granted financing for renovation through a direct 
transfer of fertilizer to farmers for seedlings (FNC 2013). Ac­
cording to the testimonies of participants in the workshops, 
focus groups, and individual interviews, many male coffee 
producers were initially reluctant to renovate by replanting 
with new coffee stock because of the associated risks of 
planting unknown varieties and the related costs of losing 
the harvest of the plants that still produced. Aside from being 
resistant to the idea of felling trees that continued to produce 
coffee, some producers had outstanding debts that prevented 
them from participating in the new program. By contrast, the 
receptivity of women was much greater, and the Departmental 
Committees of Coffee Growers sought women’s participa­
tion as a mechanism to expand the renovated acreage. The 
main strategy they used was to assign additional plots of 
land to women who wanted to expand their farms through 
new production. 
The coffee renovation program thus produced a change 
in a significant percentage of the coffee growing families in 
terms of gender. For one, women were now given the oppor­
tunity to acquire the coffee producer identification card (ID) 
that provides them access to the incentives provided by FNC 
programs. The credit incentive program of PSF, for example, 
forgave or condoned 40 percent of the total amount of credit, 
once the number of seedlings planted in each project was 
certified, providing a strong incentive to renovate. To consider 
each plot as a productive unit, and for women to acquire the 
coffee producer ID, they had to own at least half a hectare 
and 1,500 coffee trees. In cases where women had no land, 
this issue was resolved through an affidavit by the landowner 
(parent, spouse, or partner), which permanently conceded 
the land to a woman who now had the right to cultivate it.4 
According to extension agents working with the coffee pro­
ducers, after women acquired the plot of land, they received 
seeds to plant their seedbeds, and, after several months, their 
plots were certified as having at least 1,500 new coffee plants 
at which point they acquired the ID card. As registered cof­
fee growers, they had access to agricultural credit through 
the renovation program and subsidized fertilizers and inputs 
for coffee production. They also have full rights not only to 
participate in the elections of governing bodies of the FNC 
but also to access technical assistance, commerce, and other 
services provided by the FNC. The acquisition of the coffee 
producer ID card overcame two historical obstacles for rural 
women in general and women coffee farmers in particular: 
land ownership (that, according to Deere and León 2000, 
continues to be a significant gender asset gap) and access to 
productive resources. 
Over the course of the PSF program (2008-2013) the 
percentage of women who received credit increased by 9 
percent. This is a good proxy for the percentage of women 
who acquired ID cards because the main incentive to apply 
for the ID card was to access credit (Figure 1).
It should be noted that despite this advancement of 
women in coffee production, the change is still limited. The 
vast majority of partners or wives of male producers (71% 
of the total population with producer IDs) do not have their 
own IDs or are not recognized as direct coffee producers. 
Hence, the full incorporation of women in the coffee indus­
try still has a long way to go. Below, we explore changes 
in gender roles and women’s empowerment in southwest 
Colombia in the context of these coffee renovation and 
certification programs.
Figure 1. 	Participation of Women in the Total of Credits 
Granted by the PSF program (2008-2013) 
(Source: estimated based on the Coffee 
Information System (Sica) and the Benefi­
ciary Selection System for Social Programs 
(Sisben). Information is provided by the 
Direction of Economic Research of the FNC.)

 67
VOL. 78, NO. 1, SPRING  2019
Empowerment and Methodology
The concept of empowerment has been embedded in 
historic struggles for social justice and important movements 
of the late 20th century (liberation theology, popular educa­
tion, Black power, etc.) Many feminist scholars who work 
on the concept of empowerment strive to maintain the sharp 
political perspective from which it arose (Batliwala 2007). 
Ibrahim and Alkire (2007) review a wide range of definitions 
of empowerment that differ based on their emphases. How­
ever, the pathway of women’s empowerment research draws 
especially on the work of Kabeer (1994, 1999, 2005) and other 
feminist authors, such as Rowlands (1997) and León (1997).
According to Kabeer (1999, 2005), empowerment is 
closely related to three dimensions: resources, agency, and 
achievements. Resources are the means by which agency is 
exercised. Agency represents the processes by which decisions 
are made, and achievements are the product of the exercise 
of agency. She emphasizes the indivisibility of these three 
dimensions and points out that access to resources cannot 
be a direct indicator of empowerment. Access to resources 
does not mean by itself the exercise of choice; it is more a 
measure of the potential for such choice.
The key concept in empowerment is agency because it 
correlates with people’s action and decision making (Alkire 
2008). However, what matters in the process of empower­
ment are the strategic life choices and “choices which had 
been denied to them in the past” (Kabeer 1999:445). Greater 
access to resources does not translate into agency in the same 
way for different people, given the different structures, norms, 
and constraints (Alkire 2008). Because it might be expected 
that increases in agency in one domain might have positive 
“spillover” effects in others, we simultaneously assessed the 
agency in each of the domains or dimensions of empower­
ment rather than approaching them as separate dimensions. 
According to our aim of assessing women’s empower­
ment in the context of coffee renovation and certification 
programs, the methodological design for this study began with 
the identification and definition of analytical categories that 
link the theoretical approach of empowerment as a concept 
with the reality of the world of coffee production in Colombia. 
The analysis was anchored within the three areas identified 
in the FNC policy: economic, social, and good governance. 
The environmental domain was excluded because it had al­
ready been the subject of an in-depth survey that contributed 
to the definition of environmental policy guidelines for the 
Colombian coffee sector.
Table 1 presents the categories and subcategories for each 
axis that were defined to assess the empowerment process of 
women coffee growers. We delineated four categories for the 
economic axis, four for the social axis, and two for the good 
governance axis. These ten categories gave rise to twenty-
four sub-categories, which guided the field research. These 
categories and sub-categories arose from a deductive and 
inductive double process: they emerged from the research 
team’s discussion of existing literature and our previous 
research experiences as well as continual validation and ad­
justment based on field research. According to the conceptual 
framework, in each subcategory, we sought to concentrate on 
the agency exercised by the women farmers. For reasons of 
length limitations, this article only focuses on the analysis of 
the economic and good governance areas.
We used a mixed methodology combining qualitative and 
quantitative approaches, but for this article, we will focus on 
qualitative data results.5 Fieldwork was conducted in June and 
July of 2014 and consisted of semi-structured interviews with 
leaders of departmental and municipal committees of coffee 
growers and regional officials of FNC; one workshop per de­
partment lasting a day and a half with coffee growers, leaders, 
and member associations; two focus groups per department 
for men and women carried out separately; and finally, visits 
to coffee farms located relatively close to the municipalities. 
The workshops were designed to provide a broader format 
for discussing gender relations (in comparison to the focus 
groups), as their primary focus was on access and control of 
resources. The workshops also served as a forum to provide 
training to participants and included games and small group 
work. Seventy percent of the participants were women. 
 In total, eighteen men and forty-four women partici­
pated in the workshops, nineteen men and twenty women 
participated in the focus groups, and we visited fifteen farms. 
All individual interviews, workshops, and focus groups dis­
cussions were recorded and transcribed. This information was 
coded using the Nvivo program according to the analytical 
categories detailed above. 
Assessing Empowerment 
In this section, we examine the following categories: 
labor, coffee production and specialty coffee, organizational 
capacity of women, and coffee commercialization. In each 
of these categories, the main findings are summarized below.
Labor and Distribution of Activities in the Households 
and in the Farm 
One of the main exercises carried out with the partici­
pants in the workshops using a time allocation technique was 
charting the gendered distribution of tasks. This technique 
highlighted the distribution of activities throughout the dif­
ferent stages of the crop calendar. The increasing participation 
of women as coffee producers has brought about significant 
changes in the distribution of tasks and activities between 
men and women as well as among the different members of 
the farming families. These changes are not generalized but 
show further diversification of multiple arrangements that 
exist in the different family groups.
According to the time allocation table produced by 
the participants, there are differences in the use of time 
between men and women. In general, the working hours of 
women are longer than men’s, but the type of activities vary 
widely depending on the type of arrangements that exist in 

68 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
the household, its composition, and the family life course, 
especially in terms of the age of the children. These results 
are consistent with the recent National Survey of Time Use 
for the Colombian rural sector. The survey shows that while 
women spend an average of 2:31 hours in paid work per day 
and 6:35 hours in unpaid household reproductive work, the 
situation is completely reversed for men who spend 5:11 
and 2:00 hours, respectively, in paid and unpaid activities 
(DANE 2014).6
Three types of family arrangements were identified 
based on the gendered division of labor. The first type of 
arrangement, the traditional and the most predominant, is 
one in which the principal activity of women is in domestic 
labor such as cooking, home cleaning, washing and iron­
ing of clothes, as well as caring for children. Women also 
perform some secondary productive unpaid activities in the 
household that include feeding and caring for small livestock 
such as chickens, maintaining the home garden, washing cof­
Table 1. 	 Categories for Valuing Equity and Empowerment Based on FNC Policy
AXIS	
Categories	
Sub-categories	
Definitions
ECONOMIC 	
Labor	
1.	 Non- remunerated work 	
Value given to the ability to distribute the housework 
	
	
	
	
among household members 
	
	
2.	 Remunerated work or	
Participation in the activities and decisions in the farm
	
	
	
work with commercial value	
	
	
3.	 Health in the work 	
Attitude and level of decision with respect to health 
	
	
	
	
related to work 
	
Production of coffee 	 4.	 Inputs and technologies 	
Access and control of inputs, technologies and farm
	
and specialty coffee 	 	
	
management 
	
	
5.	 Land and coffee crop	
Access, acknowledgement, and ownership of land 
	
	
	
	
and crops 
	
	
6.	 Role of women in	
Role of women in the development of specialty coffee
	
	
	
specialty coffee 	
 
	
	
7.	 Income distribution 	
Who controls the income coming from coffee 
	
Women’s 	
8.	 Associations 	
Level of participation in organizations related to
	
Organizational 	
	
	
productive activities
	
capacity 	
 
	
Women’s 	
9.	 Commercialization 	
Level of participation in the commercialization and
	
commercialization 	
	
	
control of income/money
	
of coffee 	
 
SOCIAL	
Equal and democratic 10.	Decisions in the family	
Participation in the decision-making process related to
	
associations within 	
	
	
expenses and other important decisions
	
the coffee family 	
11.	Personal space and time	
Level of self-esteem and empowerment in 
	
	
	
	
interpersonal relations  
	
	
12.	Rights in the family 	
Level of acknowledgement of equality between 
	
	
	
	
couples
	
Rights of life free 	
13.	Violence against children 	
Level of child abuse and awareness of child rights
	
from violence	
14.	Violence between partners	 Attitude and agency against intimate partner violence
	
	
15.	Fidelity and conflict in	
Agency of women in terms of infidelity (if present)  
	
	
	
the relationships 	
 
	
Sexual and 	
16.	Contraceptives 	
Attitude and level of decision with respect to family 
	
reproductive rights 	
	
	
planning
	
in the family 	
17.	Sexual communication 	
Capacity to express about the subject of desire and
	
	
	
and negotiation 	
make decisions about sexuality 
	
Access of women to 	 18.	Education	
Own decision to get education
	
formation programs 	 19.	Capacitation	
Own decision to participate
	
and extensions 	
20.	Advice and/or extension 	
Own decision to get help in farm labor
	
	
	
services	
	
GOOD 	
Women’s participation 21. Express ideas and 	
Self-esteem to express own opinions and desires.
GOVERNANCE	 in public life in the 	
	
emotions in public
	
community 	
22.	Participation in any 	
Capacity to work with others and collective actions
	
	
	
organization 	
 
	
Leadership of women 	23.	Participation in coffee	
Level of participation in the NCF  
	
and participation in 	
	
committees  
	
political unions	
24.	Present and manage	
Level of incidence in the coffee organizations projects

 69
VOL. 78, NO. 1, SPRING  2019
fee beans, and cooking for workers at harvest time, among 
others. In this model, men are primarily concerned with the 
productive work in the farm, especially all activities related to 
coffee production such as identifying suitable land, spraying, 
fertilizing, harvesting, pulping, and marketing. Generally, in 
this model, only a few men undertake household activities, 
and women are not recognized as coffee producers (they do 
not have coffee producer IDs), and land ownership and control 
of resources are in the hands of men.
The second type of arrangement, which is growing, is 
one in which women venture into some productive activities 
related to coffee outside the domestic sphere, but their main 
functions continue to be related to household care. In this 
case, although their main activity continues to be productive, 
men sometimes undertake some unpaid domestic labor. The 
control of land and resources usually remains in the hands 
of men. Whereas women participate in many decisions, men 
remain in control of the productive investments. Although 
anchored in traditional gender roles, participants commonly 
identify this as a collaborative model since women maintain 
that they contribute to productive activities, and men, on the 
other hand, claim to help with domestic chores. However, in 
both cases, there is an acceptance that the household activities 
are the responsibility of women. We call this arrangement the 
“aid or support model” and believe that it started to emerge in 
rural areas between couples of a relatively higher educational 
level and who live closer to urban centers.
While the traditional gendered division of labor is main­
tained in the aid/support model, the level of gender equality 
does not depend so much on this aspect but more on the valu­
ation or recognition of the work and the freedom that each 
household member develops. In this regard, the exchange of 
activities between men and women allows, in some cases, the 
valorization of housework by men and better positioning of 
women in the productive dimension:
Yes, we have always shared, they help us. In my case, for 
example, he helps me in the activities of the house and 
I help him with the work on the farm and in harvesting 
coffee. Now, they [men] help us in the work we did as 
women because we are now into the issue of certification; 
because you need to have your property clean; now they 
also help to keep everything in place, to have everything 
neat, to maintain the beneficiario [place of coffee pulp­
ing and washing] well. We always share, I sometimes 
helped collect the coffee and now that we are starting to 
produce quality coffee, I concentrate more on the pulping 
and washing, as he picks the coffee. (woman famer, Huila 
focus group, June 2014)
 
The third type of arrangement, which is more common 
among women leaders and members of coffee producer as­
sociations, is one in which not only the traditional gendered 
division of labor is altered, as in the case of the previous 
model, but women also have more control of resources and 
actively participate in making decisions about farm invest­
ments. This more equitable model does not develop because 
men participate in unpaid labor associated with housework 
but because women are primarily dedicated to productive 
activities. In this case, women own or share ownership of the 
land and the productive resources and actively participate in 
investment decisions. In this case, the woman usually controls 
both the coffee sales and the income generated from coffee 
produced on her own land, and she actively participates in 
public spaces (associations, cooperatives, coffee committees, 
etc.) Usually, in these arrangements, households are in a life 
course where children are young adults or adults.
In general, the incorporation of women in productive 
paid labor as coffee producers brings positive results that 
include acquisition of new knowledge and abilities related to 
coffee production. However, this positive impact of empow­
erment also has a counterproductive effect: the increase in 
women’s workloads. The day’s labor of women who tend to 
coffee production and care for the household is exhausting. 
This was also one component highlighted by the men in the 
group discussion: 
There is one point that I want to present in this manner. In 
cases where women are contributing to the coffee produc­
tion, here in Cauca, there are a lot, but as we observed in 
all cases, the task in the kitchen, the washing of clothes, 
the maintenance of the house, continue to be the respon­
sibilities of women; and when they are contributing in the 
coffee [production] but continue doing these activities, it 
makes their workload a lot higher. What happens is that 
the activities in the house are not being commercialized, 
these do not have value like the selling of coffee. (man 
producer from Cauca, men´s focus group, July 2014)
These testimonies illustrate the central problem facing gen­
der equality initiatives in the coffee farming families, and 
this is related to how unpaid work is being distributed (or 
not) within the households and the coffee farms. It is appar­
ent that the participation of a significant group of women 
in productive paid labor has not been accompanied by the 
incorporation of men into the reproductive unpaid work. 
Additionally, mechanisms that would socialize this work so 
as not to overburden women, continue to be deficient. In this 
sense, the process of empowerment is very limited because of 
the double workload performed by women. This aspect has 
been studied extensively in the literature on gender and em­
powerment (i.e., Townsend et al. 1999; Lyon, Mutersbaugh, 
and Worthen 2017). For example, Lyon, Mutersbaugh, and 
Worthen (2017:325) working with women members of coffee 
producer associations in Oaxaca, Mexico, point out:
…[W]omen repeatedly spoke to us about how they simply 
didn’t have enough hours in the day to accomplish all of 
their tasks, which include both reproductive and produc­
tive forms of labor. From taking care of their children and 
preparing food to caring for animals, processing corn, and 
tending coffee, they worked from well before dawn into 
the late hours of the night.
This implies that the empowerment that emerges from 
the ability of an individual to increase their agency, self-
reliance, and negotiating power, as discussed by several 

70 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
authors (Kabeer 2005; Rowlands 1997), is still limited for 
those who continue to be burdened by their traditional tasks 
while performing new roles. Although these women are now 
economically independent, the manifestations of the other 
types of empowerment (collective and individual) continue 
to be very restricted. 
Organizational Capacity of Women and Specialty 
Coffee
In recent years, two basic forms of organization different 
from cooperatives have been developed by women in the Co­
lombian coffee industry. The first was generated from coffee 
renovation programs that required seedbeds and seedlings 
(chapolas and colinos) for the cultivation of new varieties of 
plants. This was an opportunity for many women to organize 
in small groups to produce chapolas and colinos from the 
seeds certified by the FNC and to sell them to the participants 
in the renovation program. The second type of organization 
was developed from expanding certification programs of 
specialty coffees that particularly involved women as the new 
heads of coffee production. The organizational capacity of 
women is linked to the processes related to the value added, 
specialty coffees. Women’s associations are promoted by 
women themselves in its quest to produce the higher quality, 
certified (fair trade, Rainforest Alliance, organic, etc.) coffee 
increasingly demanded by consumers. 
As a case in point, in the municipality of Pitalito in the 
southern part of the Huila province, there are fifteen associa­
tions of producers certified by Rainforest Alliance, UTZ, and 
fair trade. The associations pay auditors for certification, and 
if they meet the requirements, the coffee is certified, and this 
certification is reflected in coffee prices that are above the 
conventional market prices. In the case of Fair Trade, the 
premium ($0.20/kilo) is paid to the association itself and not 
to the individual farmers; this mechanism helps to strengthen 
the associations. Of the fifteen producer associations, one 
is exclusively for women, five have more than 30 percent 
women members, and the remaining nine have fewer than 30 
percent. As one female coffee producer explained:
Most of us are associated with an organization, and the 
advantage of being associated is that the benefits are 
much better. To improve the price, one must be associ­
ated or have a customer who buys the coffee from the 
group. Obviously, we have to sell quality, to sell a good 
product; and we are identified as a group for the quality 
[of our coffee]. They pay us for the coffee’s added value, 
for example the market price is Col $630,000 [125 kilos 
of coffee, $315], but since it is a specialty coffee and 
from a group that produces good coffee, we could ask for 
another Col $100,000 or $200,000 more [$50 and $100]. 
One takes it to that place and you no longer have to sell to 
traders who always want to profit and do not think about 
the coffee growers. (female coffee producer, focus group 
Huila, July 2014)
The main instrument to achieve the power to do things 
with others, which is also known as the collective dimension 
of empowerment, or the “power with,” is the organization 
(Rowlands 1997). The organizational capacity of women is 
increased through the creation of new associations, different 
from the traditional coffee cooperatives by which the FNC 
purchases coffee for export and domestic consumption. As 
elsewhere in Latin America (see Lyon 2008, for Guatemala), 
producer cooperatives have been traditionally dominated by 
men and women’s participation, and decision making power 
has been very limited. Given the emergence of some public 
programs and those created for specialty coffees, women have 
chosen to create their own associations and, in some cases, 
with the minor participation of men:
I am the secretary of a women’s organization…we are 
fifteen women who are seeking to certify quality and clean 
agriculture; to obtain better coffee prices and improve our 
quality of life and our families. The certification improves 
the prices, farms are improved…this was a job that men 
had appropriated and was not a women’s job; hence the 
certification process enabled changing the way of thinking 
[of men], side from educating the whole family from the 
smallest in terms of preserving the environment. We in 
the municipality already have 300 certified farms. (woman 
member of an association, focus group, Cauca, July 2014)
The testimonies allow us to observe the impact of the col­
lective dimension of power for women. This is not only ex­
pressed in the growth and improvement of coffee production 
but also in terms of the other impacts of collective action that 
include conservation of the environment, intergenerational 
education, the development of a multicultural society, and the 
capacity for human development in associative organizations. 
This process has many limitations but has managed to over­
come in most cases one of the main obstacles for women’s 
participation: one that arises from the patriarchal culture of 
control exerted by their partners or husbands:
When the husband is used to seeing the wife there [in 
the house] permanently and then observes that she goes 
every eight days for an activity for almost the entire day, 
this creates inconvenience. But we told them that they 
should be accompanied by their husbands to explain what 
the topic is; what was the subject, and [we] told them that 
it was to develop a productive project, because almost 
always the technical issue is handled by the husband. 
Now, we wanted to focus on women because they could 
be supportive in the decisions of farms; and we observed 
that they are working for many things, have capabilities 
and those capabilities [of a man and a woman] could 
then be joined together. (extension leader, focus group 
discussion, July 2014)
This binding element that creates tensions, but also strength­
ens the mechanisms of cooperation in the households (see 
Agarwal 1997; Kabeer 1994; Sen 1990), is expressed, in this 
case, as a single force for women farmers to be directly in­
volved with their partners and to demonstrate new possibilities 
for engaging in coffee production. In many places, we observed 
that the FNC extension professionals contributed to building 
a favorable perception by men regarding the participation of 

 71
VOL. 78, NO. 1, SPRING  2019
women in the field of coffee cultivation, something that the 
programs required; even though they still speak in terms that 
women are “supportive in the decisions of farms.”
On our visits to the coffee farms, we were accompanied 
by the agricultural extension agents in each region. On the 
way, we had the opportunity to talk with them. One of them, 
a native of that region, told us on the way back from one 
farm visit that the husband was twenty-five years older than 
the wife (who was only eighteen at the time of marriage). 
For many years, the husband reportedly would not let her 
go to meetings, and he was very jealous of her. It was the 
extensionist’s job to visit the man several times to convince 
him how important it was for his wife to be better trained in 
coffee production in case he was absent or became ill, and 
the husband finally agreed. Now she is a local leader, drives 
a motorcycle, and performs all the coffee marketing for the 
farm. Masculine identities always shape household dynamics, 
and they are capable of changing, especially when the ben­
efits of household cooperation become evident and are fully 
supported by men in the broader social arena (Pineda 2003).
Political Empowerment
In the coffee governance axis, the indicators of gender 
equality and women’s empowerment are divided into two cat­
egories: (1) women’s leadership and participation in the union 
at the departmental and municipal committees of the National 
Federation of Coffee Growers (FNC); and (2) full participation 
of women in the public life of their community, particularly 
in their ability to express ideas or opinions and their capacity 
to work with others in community organizations. The follow­
ing section analyzes briefly the first category to provide an 
overview of gender relations and the situation of women in 
the coffee region in Southwestern Andean Colombia. 
The FNC holds elections every four years to elect mem­
bers of municipal and departmental committees of coffee 
growers and delegates to the National Congress of Coffee 
Growers. On the 6th and 7th of September in 2014, the 
coffee elections were held in seventeen coffee departments 
and 559 municipalities in Colombia. It is the largest private 
electoral process in Latin America, which covers even more 
municipalities than the general elections of entire countries 
like Venezuela, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Because of women’s 
increased empowerment in recent years, this last election 
highlighted the gendered dispute of political power in the 
coffee union. 
As a case in point, in the municipality of La Plata in 
Huila, the coffee elections of September 2014 presented 
for the first time two lists (of eight members) of candidates 
composed only of women. In response to this, men expressed 
great surprise and even described the leadership of women 
in candidate lists as a “pebble in the shoe for male coffee 
farmers.” This is because the union is traditionally run by 
men and had recently experienced a major political upheaval 
during which some of the male leadership were questioned.7 
One participant specifically noted that the increasing public 
participation of his wife made him feel a little uncomfort­
able because he was not sure who would prepare the food 
for the workers, among other things. Changing traditional 
gender roles and disagreements over women’s time alloca­
tion brought by the alteration of the sexual division of labor 
will continue to face resistance if the model of production 
and reproduction of the coffee family does not find new al­
ternatives. This is something we return to in the conclusion. 
Traditionally, the participation of women in the de­
partmental and municipal committees of coffee producers 
is very low and different in each department. For the three 
departments of Southwestern Andean Colombia, during the 
period 2010-2014, of the sixteen core members and sixteen 
alternates in the three departmental committees, there were 
only two women, elected for two principal positions in the 
department of Nariño. For the period 2014-2018, the two prin­
cipal positions were maintained in Nariño, and two alternates 
were chosen in Huila and one in Nariño. At the municipal 
level, in the 102 coffee municipalities, there was also a small 
increase. For the period 2010-2014, of the 492 principals and 
485 alternates, there was 8 percent and 10 percent women 
representatives respectively, while in the period 2014-2018, 
this representation rose to 11 percent and 13 percent, which 
meant a total of 53 principals and 66 alternates from a total 
of 498 leading representatives and alternates.
In the context of the recent incorporation of a large 
number of women into coffee production, many expressed 
more interest in participating in coffee associations in order 
to access higher, specialty market prices or to undertake 
new small businesses as producing chapolas and colinos, 
coffeeshops, coffee cookies, etc. This is in comparison to 
women’s low participation in the FNC committees, which 
women do not feel generates as clear benefits. Women and 
men, who participated in the workshop in Popayán, Cauca, 
summarized the following reasons for their low participation 
in the political union:
•	
Women’s work overload in terms of having to care for 
the family, the farm, and attend meetings;
•	
Traditional public invisibility of women, which is de­
creasing to some extent due to the renovation programs 
and the creation in 2008 of the Programa de Mujeres 
Cafeteras in the FNC8;
•	
The resistance of many men in the union against the fact 
that women participate and achieve leadership in their 
work;
•	
Lack of financial resources to travel to meetings and no 
remuneration for time spent;
•	
Lack of training and knowledge; 
•	
Lack of information about deadlines, requirements, etc., 
to participate in the elections;
•	
Poor communication among many women and limited 
confidence among women making it difficult to generate 
mobilization and vote for themselves;
•	
Lack of cooperation and support from spouses and 
families.

72 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
As noted in the first section, Colombian coffee production 
has developed around a family model focused on the power 
and public visibility of men and on the reproductive work 
and domesticity of women. The cultural characteristics and 
gender relations that supported this model have been chang­
ing very slowly, and the process is influencing the coffee 
industry. One of the women stated, “The idea that men are 
more apt in politics remains very strong, and the lack of time 
that women have is a big problem because of the many tasks 
we [women] have” (woman coffee producer, focus group 
discussion, Nariño).
Some men acknowledged that they have not helped pro­
mote more favorable conditions for women to practice true 
leadership. In this sense, the perception of these men about 
how they understand women’s entitlement is very important 
and can affect the possibility for greater gender equality in the 
future. However, the spaces that have opened up for women 
in the political union have come about because of the efforts 
and persistence of some of the women. One of the woman 
leaders from Nariño who participated in the Departmental 
Committee was almost on the verge of resigning because of 
the hostile environment that she experienced, which shows 
the individual challenges that a woman leader may face. 
However, despite being taken for granted, she informed us 
that she did not renounce her participation, and this led the 
men of the Committee to learn and respect a woman’s opinion 
and value what she had to say.
Conclusions 
This research demonstrates that a significant growth 
in the proportion of women coffee producers is resulting in 
changing gender relations in rural Colombia. This process has 
been facilitated by the programs to increase coffee production 
and to overcome the coffee crisis of 2008-2009, carried out 
between 2008 and 2014. The window of opportunity opened 
by the National Government and FNC’s renovation programs 
during these years was used by many women to enhance their 
capabilities as producers and to achieve full citizenship as 
coffee producers. It was not the purpose of these programs 
to increase women’s participation, much less to empower 
women; their purpose was to renovate coffee plantations, 
increase productivity, and expand total area planted. However, 
to achieve their goals, the programs needed to involve women 
who both aided the program and themselves at the same time.
This economic and political aspects of this gender trans­
formation among small family farmers in the Andean foothills 
of Colombia has been analyzed here. In the first arena, in 
relation to the gender division of labor in the households and 
on the farm, the growth of coffee production that has been 
supported by the work of household members generates a 
major dilemma for gender equity. The recovery of produc­
tion was achieved partially by incorporating many women as 
new coffee producers in the Southwest region of Colombia. 
However, given that men continue to be the main labor force 
on the farms, it is unlikely that they will be significantly 
incorporated in reproductive unpaid work in the domestic 
realm (leaving aside aspects of tradition and culture, which 
take for granted that domestic work is exclusively a woman’s 
task). Thus, the process of women’s empowerment is very 
limited because of their double workload. In the absence of 
socialization mechanisms that encourage men to undertake 
domestic care work, the increase in coffee production will not 
be sustainable in terms of labor and gender equity.
Regarding the organizational capacity of women, many 
have discovered the practical sense of the collective dimen­
sion of empowerment, the “power with.” This “practical 
sense” is mainly related to their ability to manage and car­
ryout income generation projects. While this organizational 
capacity of women is an expression of collective agency, 
it becomes problematic because of the multiple forms in 
which power operates in gender relations. As Naila Kabeer 
(1999:441) points out, “Power relations are expressed not 
only through the exercise of agency and choice, but also 
through the kinds of choices people make.” Many women 
are happy because they are making choices in a context 
where this ability was previously denied to them, which 
is clearly an expression of empowerment. However, we 
characterize this collective agency in the “practical sense” 
because “there are other needs and interests which do not 
have the self-evident nature because they derive from a 
‘deeper’ level of reality, one which is not evident in daily 
life because it is inscribed in the taken-for-granted rules, 
norms and customs within which everyday life is conducted” 
(Kabeer 1999:441). Income generation projects have been 
a way to bring women together so that they generate their 
own spaces of trust and unity while acquiring their own 
resources. However, their organizations are marginal in 
the broader economic context, and it is not easy for them 
to question many prevalent gender norms, but they are ef­
fectively starting to change some of those rules.
In terms of women’s organizational capacity, this 
research provided some findings of interest for both the 
academic literature and union policy. About 31 percent of 
the loans were granted to women, and a similar percentage 
acquired coffee producer ID cards. Although many of these 
women continue to participate in certification programs, there 
are very few that belong to female coffee producer associa­
tions. This shows that there is room for greater participation 
of women in organizations. Although more research is needed 
to understand women’s collective agency in the coffee in­
dustry, what is evident in the Colombian case is that women 
have opted to create new female-only associations, different 
from the traditional coffee cooperatives through which the 
FNC purchases most of the coffee for export and domestic 
consumption. As elsewhere in Latin America, producer co­
operatives have been traditionally dominated by men, and 
women’s capacity for participation and decision making 
has been very limited (Lyon 2008; Utting-Chamorro 2005). 
New research is also needed to know to what extent these 
associations have been successful in their objectives and in 
women’s empowerment. 

 73
VOL. 78, NO. 1, SPRING  2019
Women’s leadership and political participation in the 
union has been very limited, although during the last elections 
women in some municipalities presented and campaigned 
with their own candidate slates. In general, they prefer to 
participate in coffee associations than in union committees. 
The double burden of paid labor in coffee production and 
household responsibilities; the resistance of many men; and 
their lack of financial resources to travel to meetings, train­
ing, and knowledge, etc., combine to limit their participation. 
Thus, the union leadership continues to be a space maintained 
and preserved for men. 
This represents a great challenge for coffee institutions. 
The FNC should strengthen and encourage the full participa­
tion of women in the municipal and departmental committees 
of coffee growers so that the leadership participation is rep­
resentative of their producers as a whole, which would mean 
more than doubling women’s current representation. The FNC 
and coffee certification programs should also facilitate the as­
sociation of coffee women, not only to achieve new markets 
but also to advance the empowerment of women and reduce 
the wide gender inequality gaps in rural areas. Associations 
are the most important tools for the empowerment of women. 
Through them, they access training, undertake projects, sup­
port themselves against violence, and gain agency.
Finally, to make the coffee production sustainable, the 
model cannot rest on the intensification of women’s work, 
as is currently happening. If we want to advance in gender 
equity, it is necessary to develop programs that alter the sexual 
division of labor and facilitate the incorporation of men into 
unpaid domestic work. Programs with a gender perspective 
must incorporate male participation and critical discussions of 
masculinities.9 But it is also important that the State and society 
provide mechanisms for the socialization of domestic care 
work. Care remains one of the most important topics for gender 
justice in Latin America and elsewhere (Arango et al. 2018).
Notes
1The modernization of coffee cultivation that started in the 1970s 
did not involve mechanization, and the harvesting of coffee was done 
manually as were most of the production processes. In this regard, “the 
modernization of coffee cultivation did not diminish the agricultural 
work performed by women, on the contrary, it increased (as employees 
and/or non-salaried family workers) as the coffee production increased 
significantly” (Rodríguez Giraldo 2009:57). 
2Because of the decrease in production, the income of FNC coming 
from a $0.06 tax on every pound of exported coffee (called the coffee 
contribution), fell sharply, prompting the National Government to al­
locate an annual average of $40 million during the period 2007-2011 
(Silva Restrepo 2012).
3Data from the Coffee Information System SICA of the FNC.
4The affidavit process arose in response to pressures to expand pro­
duction and meet the goals of the coffee renovation program. However, 
according to some participants, at that time, there was strong discussion 
and opposition from male leaders at national level because considering 
the coffee plot as a new productive unit was dividing the farms.
5The survey covered five topics and included thirty-eight questions 
grouped according to sub-categories described in Table 1. For com­
parison, we applied the survey to two groups of women: women coffee 
growers with producer IDs and wives or partners of men with producer 
IDs. The survey was administered to a representative sample (at the 
departmental level) of 384 coffee growers.
6From a gender perspective, one aspect that should be considered 
for the assessment of rural labor is the level of physical effort and con­
ditions demanded by the work that men generally perform in the field 
(Jackson 2001). Men recognized the work of women, especially their 
contributions in the production of high quality coffee, but they also 
noted with caution that heavy work such as lifting packages, spraying, 
etc., is generally done by men.
7At the beginning of 2013, the small coffee producers staged a 
national strike that, with the blockade of the main national roads, 
paralyzed the country. This strike called into question the leader­
ship and representation of the FNC and the national government’s 
coffee policy.
8Programa de Mujeres Cafeteras was an alliance between the Conse­
jería Presidencial para la Equidad de la Mujer and the FNC in 2008 for 
greater visibility of women coffee makers. This program promoted the 
participation of women in business fairs and their training in different 
topics through regional events until 2010.
9Recently, the Canadian cooperation program for agricultural asso­
ciations in Colombia has developed a gender equity strategy with full 
incorporation of men and masculinities (http://impact.coop/).
References Cited
Agarwal, Bina 
	
1997	 “Bargaining” and Gender Relations: Within and Beyond the 
Household. Feminist Economics 3(1):1-51.
Alkire, Sabina 
	
2008	 “Concepts and Measures of Agency.” Oxford Poverty and 
Human Development Initiative (OPHI). Working Paper 10. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Queen Elizabeth House, University 
of Oxford.
Arango, Luz Gabriela, Adira Amaya, Tania Pérez-Bustos, and Javier 
Pineda
	
2018	 Género y cuidado: Teorías escenarios y políticas. Bogotá, 
Colombia: Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Universidad de 
los Andes y Universidad Pontificia Javeriana.
Bacon, Christopher M.
	
2010	 A Spot of Coffee in Crisis: Nicaraguan Smallholder 
Cooperatives, Fair Trade Networks, and Gendered Empowerment. 
Latin American Perspectives 37(2):50-71.
Batliwala, Srilatha
	
2007	 Taking the Power Out of Empowerment. Development in 
Practice 17(4-5):557-564.
Bernal, Oscar Mauricio
	
2016	 Hacia la sostenibilidad cafetera: Un análisis de política 
pública. Bogotá, Colombia: Universidad de los Andes.
Deere, Carmen Diana, and Magdalena León 
	
2000	 Género, Propiedad y Empoderamiento: Tierra, Estado y 
mercado en América Latina. Bogotá, Colombia: Universidad 
Nacional/Tercer Mundo.

74 
HUMAN
ORGANIZATION
Departamento Nacional de Estadísticas (DANE)
	
2014	 Encuesta Nacional de Uso del Tiempo (ENUT). Presentación 
de resultados. Bogotá, Colombia: Departamento Nacional de 
Estadísticas.
Federación Nacional de Cafeteros (FNC)
	
2013	 Cafés especiales blindan a productores ante baja cotización 
internacional. Al Grano. Edición 32. 
García, Julian
	
2003	 Evolución de la distribución de las fincas cafeteras. Hacía una 
regionalización de la caficultura colombiana. Bogotá, Colombia: 
Federación Nacional de Cafeteros.
Guhl Corpas, Andres Ernesto
	
2008	 Café y Cambio de Paisaje en Colombia, 1970-2005. Bogotá, 
Colombia: Fondo Editorial Universidad EAFIT.
Ibrahim, Solava, and Sabina Alkire
	
2007	 Agency and Empowerment: A Proposal for Internationally 
Comparable Indicators. Oxford Development Studies 35(4):379-
403.
Jackson, Cecile, ed.
	
2001	 Men at Work: Labour, Masculinities, Development. Hoboken, 
NJ: Taylor and Francis.
Kabeer, Naila
	
1994	 Reversed Realities. Gender Hierarchies in Development 
Thought. 1st ed. London, United Kingdom: Verso.
	
1999	 Resources, Agency, Achievements: Reflections on the 
Measurement of Women’s Empowerment. Development and 
Change 30(3):435-464.
	
2005	 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A Critical 
Analysis of the Third Millennium Development Goal. Gender 
and Development 13(1):13-24.
León, Magdalena, ed.
	
1997	 Poder y empoderamiento de las mujeres. 1st ed. Bogotá, 
Colombia: Tercer Mundo Editores.
Lyon, Sarah
	
2007	 Maya Coffee Farmers and Fair Trade: Assessing the Benefits 
and Limitations of Alternative Markets. Culture & Agriculture 
29(2):100-112.
	
2008	 We Want to be Equal to Them: Fair-trade Coffee Certification 
and Gender Equity within Organizations. Human Organization 
67(3):258-268.
Lyon, Sarah, Tad Mutersbaugh, and Holly Worthen
	
2017	 The Triple Burden: The Impact of Time Poverty on Women’s 
Participation in Coffee Producer Organizational Governance in 
Mexico. Agricultural Human Values 34(2):317-331.
Murray, Douglas L., Laura T. Raynolds, and Peter L. Taylor
	
2006	 The Future of Fair Trade Coffee: Dilemmas Facing Latin 
America’s Small-scale Producers. Development in Practice 
16(2):179-192.
Narayan, Deepa, ed.
	
2005	 Measuring Empowerment: Cross-disciplinary Perspectives. 
Washington DC: The World Bank.
Pineda, Javier
	
2003	 Masculinidades, género y desarrollo. Sociedad civil, machismo 
y microempresa. Bogotá, Colombia: Ediciones Uniandes.
Ramírez Bacca, Renzo
	
2015	 “Mujeres en la caficultura tradicional colombiana, 1910-
1970.” Revista Historia y Memoria 10:43-73.
Rodríguez Giraldo, Viviana
	
2009	 Contexto rural caficultor en Colombia: Consideraciones desde 
un enfoque de género. La manzana de la Discordia 4(1):53-62.
Rowlands, Jo
	
1997	 Questioning Empowerment. Working with Women in 
Honduras. 1st ed. London, United Kingdom: Oxfam.
Santillán, Diana, Sidney Schuller, Hoang T. Anh, Tran H. Minh, Quach 
T. Trang, and Nguyen M. Duc
	
2004	 Developing Indicators to Assess Women’s Empowerment in 
Vietnam. Development in Practice 14(4):534-549.
Schuller, Sidney R., and Elisabeth Rottach
	
2010	 Women’s Empowerment Revisited: A Case Study from 
Bangladesh. Development in Practice 20(7):840-854.
Sen, Amartya
	
1990	 Gender and Cooperative Conflicts. In Persistent Inequalities: 
Women and World Development. Irene Tinker, ed. Pp. 123-149. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Silva Restrepo, Santiago
	
2012	 Evaluación de impacto de los programas de renovación de 
cafetales 2007-2011: Efectos sobre la capacidad productiva de los 
caficultores colombianos. Coyuntura económica: Investigación 
económica y social 42(2):15-58.
Townsend, Janet, Pilar Alberti, Marta Mercado, Jo Rowlands, and 
Emma Zapata
	
1999	 Women and Power: Fighting Patriarchy and Poverty. London, 
United Kingdom: Zed.
Utting-Chamorro, Karla
	
2005	 Does Fair Trade Make a Difference? The Case of Small Coffee 
Producers in Nicaragua. Development in Practice 15(3-4):584-599.
