CHAPTER 11
Decaffeination using supercritical
carbon dioxide
Giovani L. Zabot
Laboratory of Agroindustrial Processes Engineering (LAPE), Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM), Cachoeira do Sul, Brazil
Contents
1. Introduction
255
2. Carbon dioxide as a green supercritical fluid
256
3. Why extracting caffeine?
257
4. Decaffeination by supercritical technology
258
4.1 Batch process
259
4.2 Semicontinuous and continuous processes
261
4.3 Process parameters
263
4.4 Economic approach
270
4.5 Life-cycle assessment approach
271
5. Decaffeination of coffee
272
6. Decaffeination of tea
274
7. Decaffeination using carbon dioxide at industrial scale
275
8. Future outlooks
276
Acknowledgments
277
References
277
1. Introduction
Caffeine (alkaloid) is one of the most well-known psychoactive compounds worldwide.
Since the last five decades, the per capita consumption of caffeine in the world has
increased by approximately 100% as a consequence of the increase in consumption of
teas, energy drinks, and coffee. Based on this fact, several scientific studies have been per-
formed to evaluate the physiological actions of caffeine. Up to now, it has not been pos-
sible to reach a consensus on its positive and negative effects. The controversial
information eventually led to an increase in consumption of decaffeinated products, gen-
erally by medical advice.
The decaffeination is an alternative to provide products without caffeine or with a
reduced content of caffeine. Some methods use organic solvents, such as alcohol, dichlor-
omethane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, or acetone. Other methods use water and super-
critical CO2. The CO2 under supercritical conditions is preferable because it can
255
Green Sustainable Process for Chemical and Environmental Engineering and Science
© 2020 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817388-6.00011-8
All rights reserved.

retain most of the compounds that give taste and flavor. Decaffeination by supercritical
CO2 is a relatively recent technology that is expanding in several countries.
Based on this context, this chapter has the objective to present and discuss the main
characteristics of decaffeination by supercritical CO2. Even though after performing the
extraction processes two fractions are obtained, the emphasis is put on decaffeinated
products (coffee beans, tea leaves, cocoa beans, etc.) instead of the extract. The construc-
tive discussion is focused on the solid material without or with a reduced content of caf-
feine. The aim is to overview the contribution of the supercritical technology using a
green and renewable solvent (CO2) toward making the realistic high-pressure decaffei-
nation process widespread and even more feasible.
2. Carbon dioxide as a green supercritical fluid
A supercritical fluid has simultaneously properties of gas and liquid, especially a high
solubility and a low viscosity, respectively. Pure substances submitted to pressure and
temperature higher than the critical conditions (critical temperature and critical
pressure—critical point) are called supercritical fluids. In the phase diagram, the visible
differences between liquid and gas phases disappear in this region and the fluid inter-
changes between liquid-like/gas-like characteristics. This phenomenon of interchanging
is more pronounced in the region near to the critical point because there is a high sol-
vation power, where the physicochemical characteristics are highly sensitive to changes
in the parameters of pressure and temperature.
CO2 (critical pressure of approximately 7.4MPa and critical temperature of approx-
imately 31°C) is a fluid used to fulfill supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) because it permits
the operation at moderate temperature. Overall, supercritical CO2 is commonly applied
for extracting nonpolar and moderate polar phytochemicals. The density of CO2 can be
altered by modifying the system conditions (especially pressure or temperature), espe-
cially in the region near to the critical point. Therefore, the selective extraction of dif-
ferent phytochemicals can be reached. CO2 has other advantages, as the large availability
in the environment, the nontoxic properties, and the easy separation from the products
(liquid extracts and solid coproducts) by decompression at room pressure (approximately
0.1MPa). This last one advantage can make the extracted material a solvent-free product
to be applied in several industrial fields, as in the biochemical, pharmaceutical, chemical,
materials, cosmetic, and food-related fields.
The solubility of a diversified quantity of phytochemicals in supercritical CO2 or
other supercritical fluids can change significantly because it is closely related to solvent
density. Consequently, the solubility of different bioactive compounds depends on pres-
sure and temperature. Typically, the solubility of CO2 increases near the critical point.
Thereafter, it can decrease if the system is compressed, leading to dominant repulsive
CO2-solute-cosolvent interactions. Otherwise, increased solubility can occur when
256
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

attractive CO2-solute-cosolvent interactions take place, which is a feature of small chain
and highly volatile molecules. It is desirable to fulfill the extractions as far as possible from
the equilibrium solubility. The best choice is to use an excess of CO2 to have a none-
quilibrium condition. However, there is a limit value of excess of solvent imposed by
the CO2 characteristics and operational procedures (capacities of pump, pipes, valves,
and heat exchangers, among others) that prevent the use of a larger excess of CO2. In
general, Table 1 presents a brief compilation of solubility data of caffeine in CO2 found
in some solid matrices.
3. Why extracting caffeine?
Caffeine (C8H10N4O2, molar mass of 194.1906g/mol, also known as 1H-Purine-2,6-
dione, 3,7-dihydro-1,3,7-trimethyl- or 1,3,7-trimethyl-2,6-dioxopurine) is a methyl-
xanthine alkaloid found in several parts of plants, like beans, nuts, seeds, and leaves. It
isastimulantandtheformIofcaffeineismetastable.Thisformisonlystableattemperatures
ranging from 155°C to 237°C. The form II is stable at room conditions, as 20–25°C.
One well-known source of caffeine is the coffee bean and the well-known products
containing caffeine are drinks as coffee, tea, energy drinks, and chocolate, among others.
Table 1 Solubility data of caffeine in supercritical CO2 with or without a cosolvent
Pressure
(MPa)
Temperature
(°C)
Cosolvent
Solubility (mmol/kmol
solvent)a
Ref.
15
40
–
61.0
[31]
15
60
–
106.3
[31]
25
40
–
64.8
[31]
25
60
–
125.3
[31]
22
40
14% methanol (molar
basis)
360.0
[32]
10
40
–
140.0
[33]
20
40
–
220.0
[33]
28
40
–
360.0
[33]
15
40
Water (103.7mol/m3)
3150.0
[34]
35
50
–
87.0
[35]
35
60
–
66.6
[35]
30
40
Water (saturated)
7100.0
[36]
24
70
5% Ethanol (molar
basis)
1600.0
[37]
18
40
5% Ethanol (molar
basis)
1200.0
[37]
15
50
5% Isopropanol (molar
basis)
250.0
[37]
aThe solvent means the supercritical CO2 with the addition of modifier (if applicable).
257
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

The extraction of caffeine from the plants aims at presenting a decaffeinated product, as
decaffeinated coffee or decaffeinated tea.
Producing and processing coffee is one of the industrial areas most economically rel-
evant around the world. Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, and Mexico are the main pro-
ducers of coffee, which can account more than 3 million tons per year (almost 60% of
the worldwide production). The current annual worldwide production is larger than
5.5million tons. The ingestion of caffeine favors oxidation of fat and speeds up metab-
olism. Furthermore, caffeine can block adenosine receptors on the central nervous sys-
tem. Otherwise, caffeine intake can cause some adverse effects, such as palpitations,
gastrointestinal disturbances, anxiety and malaise, mood changes, insomnia and sleep
problems, and increased blood pressure. When the consumption of beverages containing
caffeine is relatively high, some consumers change the comfort of drinking the beverages
to the discomfort. For some people, especially who have health problems, the pleasure of
drinking caffeinated products is not outweighed by the caffeine-fueled negatives.
Therefore, extraction of caffeine is a goal of companies that sell a decaffeinated prod-
uct ready for consumption. For example, coffee needs to have more than 97% of the caf-
feine extracted for being called decaffeinated. Such kind of coffee is another product
available to consumers who want to taste the aroma of coffee without experiencing
the stimulant effects of caffeine. The decaffeination process is used to remove harshness
and irritation compounds. Unfortunately, some processes leave a bland coffee beverage
with low flavor. Coffee has up to 1500 different chemical compounds, including alka-
loids, phenolics, and terpenes, among others. Therefore, the extraction of only caffeine is
a hard task because approximately 2% (mass basis) of this compound should be removed
without altering significantly the original flavor and characteristics of the product. Fur-
thermore, caffeine extracted from coffee beans, tea leaves, cocoa beans, and cola nuts can
be used in the production of cosmetics (for the treatment of localized excess fat), soft
drinks, cola-type drinks, energy drinks, and psychoactive drugs (e.g., for treating neural-
gia and headache), among other products.
The water solubility of caffeine is approximately 16mg/mL (approximately 1.48mol/
kmol water) [1]. Regarding supercritical CO2 (with or without some modifiers), the sol-
ubility of caffeine in this solvent is presented in Table 1. The levels of caffeine in some
common products are presented in Table 2. It is estimated that approximately 10% of the
current consumption of coffee-based beverages (e.g., coffee, energy drinks, and choco-
late drinks) in the United States and Europe are decaffeinated beverages.
4. Decaffeination by supercritical technology
Decaffeination is the extraction of caffeine from yerba mate, coffee, guarana, tea, cocoa, and
other plants by different methods. Commonly, the decaffeination can be fulfilled by water
immersion, water-ethyl acetate immersion, methylene chloride (or dichloromethane)
258
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

extraction, and supercritical CO2 extraction. In the water immersion, the caffeine is dis-
solved in water and can be removed by activated carbon or other adsorbents as agricultural
solid coproducts (e.g., rice husks). In the water-ethyl acetate immersion, the caffeine is
extracted from the seeds, beans, nuts, or leaves by ethyl acetate, which the solvent flows
through the solid matrix embedded in water. In the methylene chloride extraction, the caf-
feine is removed from the solid biomass by this solvent using mild temperatures (generally
near to 40°C). In such case, the moisture of the solid matrix should be high. Until the mid-
1970s, the dichloromethane was extensively used for extraction of caffeine. Although the
residual amount of dichloromethane in the solid biomass is not too high (below the limit
defined by the Food and Drug Administration), recent concerns about the problems to
humans have risen due to its high toxic effects.
Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction (SFE-CO2) uses CO2 above its critical con-
ditions of pressure and temperature to solubilize the caffeine. The SFE-CO2 process has
some advantages whether compared to the other methods because uses a nontoxic sol-
vent at mild conditions (especially temperature). The consumption of energy is generally
lower than those associated with conventional processes and the CO2 can be easily sep-
arated from the products by a simple decompression. Indeed, the main process of remov-
ing caffeine and maintaining most of the other flavor substances from coffee, tea, cocoa,
and yerba mate, among others, is CO2. This solvent practically does not attack the car-
bohydrates (e.g., sugars and starch) and proteins. This fact is important because several
compounds that give aroma and flavor are converted from proteins after roasting. Since
1970, the worldwide use of SFE-CO2 is being expanded. Supercritical technology is
considered green and sustainable, especially for decaffeination. Therefore, this section
is intended to provide the main characteristics of processing plants containing caffeine
with supercritical CO2.
4.1 Batch process
CO2 has some positive characteristics for the extraction of caffeine. Besides the advan-
tages previously cited, CO2 has a good dissolving ability and a good mass transfer per-
formance (rapid penetration ability). SFE-CO2 of caffeine is generally more efficient
Table 2 Average levels of caffeine in coffee drinks, tea, chocolate, and sodas
Soft drink
Caffeine (mg/100mL)
Express coffee
250–330
Decaffeinated coffee
1–5
Soluble coffee
30–120
Instantaneous tea
25–50
Chocolate
2–20
Sodas
2–20
259
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

because lower aromatic substances can be lost during the decaffeination process. One
operational mode of extracting caffeine is by a batch process, which the biomass (e.g.,
coffee, tea, yerba mate, cocoa, etc.) and the CO2 are mixed in a fixed bed during a static
time under a defined values of pressure and temperature. After the static extraction time,
which generally occurs in a few hours, the bed is depressurized, the extract is collected,
and the solid matrix is recovered.
Typically, large-scale extraction comprises vessels of volume higher than 20 m3.
According to Lack and Seidlitz [2], decaffeination of coffee beans by SFE-CO2 under
a batch and nonisobaric process presents different cost estimates, as € 1.10/kg feed for
a capacity of 3500tons/year and € 0.75/kg feed for a capacity of 7000tons/year. In fact,
the decaffeination of coffee by SFE-CO2 under a batch and isobaric process is commonly
more economically feasible. For the capacities of 3500 tons/year and 7000tons/year, the
costs estimates are € 0.85/kg feed and € 0.55/kg feed, respectively.
The batch process is commonly performed in a single-stage mode since the solids
(beans, leaves, etc.) are difficult to process in pressurized vessels by a continuous mode
due to their particulate forms [3]. Furthermore, there is no harmful residue in the decaf-
feinated material (solid material) because the CO2 is a solvent that can be completely and
easily removed without a further treatment. A schematic flowchart of decaffeination in a
batch process is shown in Fig. 1.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
CO2 reservoir
CO2 filter
Blocking valve
Pressure gauge
Cooling exchanger
High-pressure pump
Extraction vessel
Micrometering valve
Temperature controller
Extract separator
Compressor
Buffer tank
Safety valve
Fig. 1 Typical flowchart of decaffeination by SFE-CO2 in a batch process; dashed lines indicate a
noncontinuous flow.
260
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

4.2 Semicontinuous and continuous processes
Other modes of extracting caffeine are performed by semicontinuous (also known as semi-
batch) and continuous processes. In the semicontinuous process, the solid biomass is fed into a
fixed bed and the CO2 flows continuously to the bed under the defined values of temperature
and pressure. Caffeine is recovered overtime at the extraction vessel outlet (Fig. 2). In the
continuous process, the solid biomass and the CO2 are mixed and pressurized continuously
by a pump to the bed under the defined conditions of temperature and pressure. At the vessel
outlet, caffeine and a decaffeinated solid material are separated (Fig. 3).
A recent study dealing with SFE-CO2 under a semicontinuous mode for extraction of
caffeine was performed with black tea [4]. At the beginning of the process, 500g black tea
with particle size ranging from 600 to 780μm and 2.16% (mass basis) caffeine content was
mixed with 300mL water and loaded into the extractor (10L). After evaluating different
values of temperature and pressure, the mass extraction yield ranged from 16.2% to 100%.
Commonly, in the extraction processes the biomass is saturated with water to increase the
solubility of caffeine. It is important to mention that the critical overview and discussion
of the effect of process parameters on the decaffeination is provided into Section 4.3.
In most of the cases, the semicontinuous mode is applied. This mode allows using
pumps that pressurize fluids (pure substances or mixtures) without particles, like CO2.
As presented in Fig. 2, the steps consist of cooling CO2 to change its phase from gas
to liquid using a cooler, pressurizing CO2 to the target pressure using a high-pressure
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
CO2 reservoir
CO2 filter
Blocking valve
Pressure gauge
Cooling exchanger
High-pressure pump
Extraction vessel
Micrometering valve
Temperature controller
Extract seperator
Compressor
Buffer tank
Safety valve
Flowmeter
Flow totalizer
14
15
16
Heating exchanger
Fig. 2 Typical flowchart of decaffeination by SFE-CO2 in a semicontinuous process.
261
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

pump, heating CO2 to the desired temperature using a jacketed heater, pumping CO2
into the vessels containing the fixed bed (biomass mixed with water), and collecting the
extracted caffeine at the exit of the vessels (in the separators) because CO2 flowing
through the fixed-bed solubilizes caffeine. Thereafter, the decaffeinated biomass is
unloaded from the vessel for drying. The moisturizing step in the beginning of the pro-
cess is important for decaffeination regardless of the solvent. The main characteristics of
the systems operating in semicontinuous mode include a short CO2 residence time, a
long solid residence time, a possibility of allowing different sizes of particles (in the ranges
of micrometers until a few centimeters), an adjustable solvent to feed mass ratio, and a
medium process control.
A supercritical laboratory scale system from Thar Technologies Inc. (Pittsburgh,
United States) having a vessel of 1L was used in experimental assays for decaffeination
of orthodox Kangra tea (particles ranging from 7.1 to 9.1mm) in a semicontinuous mode.
SFE-CO2 with cosolvent (water) was performed at different temperatures (35–85°C) and
pressures (9–17MPa) [5]. The semicontinuous mode was performed with a fixed bed
(900g of orthodox Kangra black tea) and a continuous CO2 flow rate (60g/min) for
90min. The first separator was maintained at a pressure of 8–9MPa and a temperature
range from 10°C to 9°C. The second separator was maintained at a pressure ranging
from 2 to 3MPa and a temperature ranging from 5°C to 0°C. At 90°C and 17MPa (in
the extraction vessel), approximately 48% (mass basis) was removed, reducing the caffeine
content from 1.71% to 0.89%.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
CO2 reservoir
CO2 filter
Blocking value
Pressure gauge
Cooling exchanger
High-pressure pump
Extraction vessel
Back pressure valve
Temperature controller
Extract/solid seperator
Compressor
Buffer tank
Safety valve
Flowmeter
Flow totalizer
14
15
16
Heating exchanger
(particulate fluid)
Fig. 3 Typical flowchart of decaffeination by SFE-CO2 in a continuous process.
262
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

The continuous mode needs pumps that pressurize particulate fluids, that is, a mixture
of solvent and particles of biomass. As presented in Fig. 3, the steps consist of cooling CO2
to change its phase from gas to liquid using a cooler, mixing CO2 with milled biomass,
pressurizing the mixture of CO2 and solid biomass to the target pressure using a high-
pressure pump, heating the mixture to the desired temperature using a jacketed heater,
pumping continuously the mixture into the vessels for having the extraction, and collect-
ing the bulk extract mixed with biomass at the outlet of the vessels (in the separators). The
main characteristics of the systems operating in continuous mode include a short CO2
residence time, a short solid residence time, the necessity of using really small particles
(generally micrometric particles), a high solvent to feed mass ratio, and a high process
control.
Unfortunately, decaffeination in continuous mode is uncommon because some chal-
lenges should be overcome. The main challenge refers to pumping the mixture of moist-
ened solids and CO2. There are a limited number of high-pressure pumps that can
pressurize particulate fluids. The particles can block the piping and cause a high-pressure
drop. Therefore, it is preferable to perform the procedures in a semicontinuous mode
with various extraction vessels disposed of in parallel, which can represent a pseudo-
continuous mode. This strategy can be based on the methodological approaches
presented by Moraes et al. [6], where a successful pseudo-continuous operating SFE
equipment was validated.
4.3 Process parameters
There are some process parameters that influence the solubility and yields of extracted
substances in processes operating with supercritical fluids. For decaffeination process,
the design of extraction vessels in supercritical processes comprises the knowledge of
phase equilibrium among the CO2, the caffeine to be extracted, and the insoluble solids
(in some cases, soluble solutes can be included herein). The main process parameters are
temperature, pressure, cosolvent type and concentration, extraction time, and solvent to
feed mass ratio.
4.3.1 Temperature
The temperature applied in the decaffeination using supercritical CO2 commonly ranges
from 35°C to 70°C. In some cases, this parameter can reach higher values, such as 120°C,
because its increase can favor mass transfer. Overall, thermal labile compounds can be
affected and degraded at mild to high temperatures while hydrolysis of compounds
and other reactions can take place [7].
The temperature is one of the process parameters that influence the solvent density
and determines the solvating power of CO2. In the decaffeination of black tea using a
pilot-scale equipment with supercritical CO2 as solvent, three levels of temperature
(55°C, 62.5°C, and 70°C) were evaluated in the process [4]. According to the authors,
263
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

the caffeine extraction yield was higher when the temperature increased at constant pres-
sure of 25MPa. Besides, no significant effect of this parameter was observed at constant
pressure of 50MPa. In fact, typically, there is an interaction between some process param-
eters, especially temperature, pressure, and cosolvent. In this referenced decaffeination of
black tea, the temperature-modifier interaction presented a different impact on decaffei-
nation yield than other interactions did. As the concentration of modifier (cosolvent)
increased, the yield increased when 62.5°C was used if compared to 55°C. However,
the yield decreased when 70°C was used if compared to 62.5°C.
Tea (black, green, etc.) is one of the most common beverages consumed in the world.
SFE-CO2 process for caffeine removal from black tea leaves was reported [8]. In such
study, three temperatures (40°C, 60°C, and 80°C) were evaluated. After a statistical anal-
ysis, the parameter temperature (principal effects) had no statistical significant effect
(P>.05) on caffeine recovery. Consequently, considering energy savings and technical
responses, lower values of temperature could be selected to extract caffeine. However,
still regarding the decaffeination of black tea leaves, a synergistic effect between temper-
ature and other parameters (pressure, ethanol concentration, and modifier flow rate) was
seen. After applying the Response Surface Methodology to define the decaffeination
conditions, the average mass decaffeination efficiency was 99.8% and the loss of phenolic
compounds was only 3.3% when the following conditions were used: 53°C, 30MPa,
0.7mL/min of modifier (ethanol as cosolvent) and 87% ethanol concentration (volumet-
ric basis). According to Bahar et al. [8], it is of remarkable importance for the decaffeina-
tion from black tea (it could be extended to other caffeinated raw materials) to remove
caffeine while maintaining the maximum quantity of phenolics (and all aromatic com-
pounds in general). Therefore, the caffeine removal and the amount of phenolic com-
pounds remaining in black tea are important responses that indicate the yield of the
process from tea by supercritical technology using CO2.
Although the decaffeination is generally applied to coffee or tea, some other
caffeine-rich natural matrices can be decaffeinated by SFE-CO2. One example of
another matrix is guarana, which is a Brazilian native plant containing up to 6% (mass
basis) of caffeine [9]. Guarana seeds and shells are often used in soft drinks (named in
Brazil as “guarana”) and as an ingredient of some medicinal products. Based on this con-
text, aiming at obtaining decaffeinated guarana seeds, a study was performed where the
SFE-CO2 process was applied. Experimental data indicated the reduction of the caf-
feine content from guarana seeds with supercritical CO2 saturated with water [10].
In that study, two levels of temperature were evaluated: 40°C and 70°C. Approxi-
mately 98% (mass basis) of caffeine was removed from seeds at 70°C for 4h, indicating
that SFE-CO2 is a successful method for the decaffeination of such seeds. As reported by
the authors [10], the decaffeination at lower levels of pressure or temperature needed
extra time and higher amounts of CO2 to obtain the same relative yield than that
obtained at 70°C, for instance.
264
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

From the foregoing outcomes, we infer that higher temperatures are recommendable
to remove caffeine from caffeinated samples. However, an integrated evaluation should
be performed, which should take into account the contents of phenolics and other aro-
matic compounds. There is a trend of solubilizing more phenolic acids at higher temper-
atures, especially when a larger content of a polar cosolvent (as modifier) is used. In some
cases, the reduction of volatile compounds is more evidenced if more caffeine is
extracted. Therefore, it is preferable to perform the processes with temperatures not
higher than 70°C.
4.3.2 Pressure
The pressure applied for the decaffeination using supercritical CO2 commonly ranges
from 10 to 35MPa. The increase in pressure raises the solvation power of CO2 as a con-
sequence of the increase in density. In some cases, pressures larger than 50MPa are
applied, including in systems that a modifier is used. Some experimental data of decaf-
feination of different caffeinated plants is presented in Table 3, where different process
conditions have been used and different findings have been obtained.
The decaffeination of coffee and tea is the most common practice worldwide regard-
ing the decaffeination process. The semicontinuous mode is the main process applied,
where the CO2 circulates through the bed and caffeine is extracted from the leaves or
beans. One alternative in the separation system is using activated carbon, which can retain
caffeine as an adsorbent. In fact, the extracted caffeine can be separated from the super-
critical CO2 by a pressure reduction to the room conditions (approximately 0.1MPa),
consequently decreasing its solubility in CO2, which becomes a gas in lower pressures.
Table 3 Experimental data for decaffeination using supercritical CO2
Biomass
T (°C)
P (MPa)
Time (h)
S/F (–)
Cosolvent
Yield (wt.%)
Ref.
Green tea
50
40
5
28.1
Water
59.8
[38]
Green tea
50
30
5
28.1
Water
43.0
[38]
Green tea
40
40
5
28.1
Water
54.0
[38]
Guarana seeds
70
40
4
273.6
Water
98.0
[10]
Black tea
62.5
37.5
5
1008
Ethanol
100
[4]
Black tea
62.5
37.5
5
1512
Ethanol
100
[4]
Black tea
55
37.5
3
604.8
Ethanol
95.4
[4]
Black tea
62.5
37.5
1
201.6
Ethanol
56.5
[4]
Coffee beans
50
13.8
3
–
Water
80.0
[12]
Cocoa beans
70
40
1
100
Water
66.4
[13]
Yerba mate
60
17
–
20.0
NA
33.9
[39]
Green tea
70
20
1
51.0
Ethanol
82.4
[27]
Black tea
85
9
1.5
6.0
Water
40.4
[5]
NA, not applicable; P, pressure; S/F, solvent to feeds mass ratio (g solvent/g biomass); T, temperature.
265
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

A study proposed a decaffeination of coffee beans using saturated CO2 [11]. After
maintaining the CO2 in contact with the beans at relatively high temperatures (up to
100°C) and high pressures (up to 30MPa), there is a fast pressure drop. In the sequence,
the beans are washed for up to 2h. Afterward, the CO2-saturated green coffee extract
containing caffeine is decaffeinated by SFE-CO2. Franca [11] also reports that liquid
CO2 submitted at lower pressures (generally <7MPa) can be used in decaffeination
processes. Green coffee beans (moisture ranging from 45% to 55%) are mixed with
water-saturated CO2 at such pressures (e.g., 6.5MPa) in order to retain most of the
flavors during the process. One drawback of this processing line is the extraction time,
which could be longer than 4 days.
Some former studies that demonstrated the possibility of decaffeination have been
developed at the end of the last century. In one of these studies, the influence of pressure
on the decaffeination of coffee beans was demonstrated by Peker et al. [12]. The authors
have tested four pressures: 10.3, 13.8, 16.5, and 19.3MPa. According to the findings,
there is an increase of the extraction rate with increasing the pressure. As seen, at the
highest pressures and temperatures (main process parameters), the data depended on
changes in operational conditions. Consequently, it means that larger variations of
extraction rates were observed in the pressures of 16.5 and 19.3MPa. Furthermore, based
on results obtained at large-scale commercial facilities, the flavor compounds released
during roasting are not recovered in the decaffeination process, which is a positive
and promising outcome.
More recently, the influence of pressure was also evaluated in the SFE-CO2 of caf-
feine from black tea leaves [4]. Caffeine recovery yield was high with high pressure.
According to the Response Surface Methodology, the interactions between the param-
eters pressure/extraction time and pressure/flow rate presented similarities on the extrac-
tion yield of caffeine. The yield of caffeine demonstrated a slight increase as pressure
increased, achieving 97.8% of decaffeination. Still considering black tea leaves, pressures
between 15 and 45MPa have been tested for the decaffeination of such raw material [8].
Caffeine extraction was high when the pressure increased up to approximately 30MPa.
Thereafter, the pressure presented a negative influence on extraction yield.
Not only coffee and teas are decaffeinated by SFE-CO2, but also cocoa beans [13]. In
such case, the authors evaluated the influence of 20 and 40MPa on the extraction of caf-
feine and theobromine. The initial amount of caffeine in cocoa beans was 0.26wt.%. The
supercritical CO2 was also compared with supercritical ethane. In all decaffeination con-
ditions,CO2providedhigheryieldsthansupercriticalethane(C2H6)did,whichjustifiesits
preference in most of the processes. When the levels of pressure were compared at 70°C,
SFE-CO2 at 40MPa yielded 66.4wt.% of decaffeination while SFE-CO2 at 20MPa
yielded 37.4wt.%.
Based on this context, we infer that pressures near to 20–40MPa are recommendable
to remove caffeine from caffeinated samples. In addition, saturating the caffeinated
266
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

samples with water is important if large extraction rates are aimed at obtaining by super-
critical technology. In such conditions, extraction rates increase as a consequence of the
high partition coefficient for caffeine between CO2 and water.
4.3.3 Time
The extraction time is one of the parameters that ultimately determine the capacity the
SFE-CO2 plant to process different quantities of biomass, including the caffeinated ones.
The extraction time depends on the raw material properties (e.g., physiology) and the
CO2 mass flow rate (Table 3). Overall, a decaffeination process can follow some steps
during the extraction time. The steps are comprised of an initial constant extraction rate
period, an intermediary falling extraction rate period that diffusion and convection of
CO2 predominate, and a final diffusion-controlled rate period. These steps are also pre-
sented in the extraction of other bioactive components, as terpenoids and tocotrienols
[14, 15]. Overall, the major modifications in the caffeinated samples occur at the begin-
ning of the extractions. Park et al. [16] reported that the extraction of caffeine was larger
at the beginning of SFE-CO2 process. More than 75.7, 93.9, and 97.8wt.% of caffeine
were recovered after 40, 80, and 120min, respectively. Consequently, more time and
CO2 were needed to extract the remained solutes as a consequence of the internal mass
transfer resistance.
The decaffeination of black tea was also reported [4]. The increase of time and the
solvent mass flow rate presented a linear effect on the decaffeination yield, while higher
values of extraction time and modifier (cosolvent) concentration presented a logarithmic
influence on the decaffeination yield. This behavior indicates an interaction between the
extraction time and these other parameters (e.g., modifier concentration and mass
flow rate).
Obviously,thedecaffeinationratesincreasewiththeincreaseofextractiontime.How-
ever, longer times are not feasible because they indicate a high CO2 consumption and a
high cost of manufacturing (COM) [17]. In the decaffeination of coffee and teas, it is com-
mon to perform the process during 60–180min. Notoriously, there are extraction times
longer than 600min. In fact, the extraction time also depends on the operating mode,
which the batch process is generally more prolonged. Furthermore, optimization of tem-
perature, pressure, flow rate or solvent to feed mass ratio, and cosolvent concentrations in
an integrated way shortens the extraction time and the efforts spent in the SFE runs.
4.3.4 Solvent to feed mass ratio
Solvent to feed mass ratio is a process parameter straightly associated with the extraction
time. This parameter is used instead of CO2 flow rate because it is a dimensionless param-
eter. Even though the CO2 flow rate depends on the size of the equipment (laboratory,
pilot, or industrial scales), the solvent to feed mass ratio does not depend on the size and
can be used for scale up purposes.
267
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

Generally, the increase of the solvent to feed mass ratio increases the mass ratio of
solute (e.g., caffeine) in the supercritical phase at the vessel exit up to a maximum value
and decreases afterward. This behavior is associated to the solubility of caffeine in the
supercritical CO2. The solubility increases at the beginning of extraction time as a con-
sequence of the initial constant extraction rate period and decreases afterward as a con-
sequence of the intermediary falling rate period and the final diffusion-controlled period.
The thermodynamic equilibrium is not a goal in the SFE-CO2 because the solvent sat-
uration would never be reached under any practical industrial application. Indeed, the
technological and economic viability analyses would define the most appropriate value
of solvent to feed mass ratio to be applied in the decaffeination of raw materials. Typically,
this ratio is close to the end of the constant extraction rate period. In some cases, this ratio
can be near the end of falling rate period as well. However, if more than 99% of decaf-
feination is needed, this ratio could be higher, which the extraction can be in the
diffusion-controlled period.
It is important to remember that caffeine is linked to phenols. Therefore, removing
the total content of caffeine can lead to reduced levels of phenols poor taste (low-quality
products). Generally, decaffeinated products are not completely caffeine-free. Such
products are called decaffeinated products, even they can contain traces or low concen-
trations of caffeine (generally <3% from the initial fresh mass content).
When processing cocoa beans [13], approximately 60wt.% of decaffeination was
reached when using 100kg CO2/kg cocoa beans. When using 700kg CO2/kg cocoa
beans, the decaffeination increased only to 66.4wt.%. The findings presented in that
work highlight the previous inference that it is preferable to operate an SFE-CO2 process
near to the end of the constant extraction rate or falling rate periods instead of the end of
the diffusion-controlled period.
When processing black tea [4], 97.2wt.% of decaffeination was reached when using
approximately 600kg CO2/kg leaves. When using approximately 1000kg CO2/kg
leaves, the decaffeination was 98.1wt.%. We can see that the ratios are relatively higher.
The CO2 is recycled and can be used again in the extractions. However, too high ratios
can cause some operational troubles or can demand high-pressure pumps with extremely
high capacities of flow rate. Indeed, these limitations can impact high investment and
operational costs. For example, if an extraction vessel is filled with 500kg of black tea
leaves and the extraction time is 180min, the CO2 flow rate should be approximately
1667kg/min to satisfy the ratio of 600kgCO2/kg leaves. Therefore, for a practical appli-
cation, all process parameters (temperature, pressure, cosolvent, etc.) should be system-
atically optimized to avoid using too high solvent to feed mass ratios.
4.3.5 Cosolvent type and concentration
Regarding cosolvent type and concentration, a cosolvent is used together with CO2 to
improve the solubility of compounds as caffeine (a polar compound). Supercritical CO2 is
268
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

properly used to recover nonpolar substances. Cosolvents, also known as modifiers, can
increase the solubility of target compounds in the mixture. The modifiers used in SFE-
CO2 process have specific properties that are indicated for specific substances (e.g., caf-
feine) or a class of substances (e.g., alkaloids). In a sustainable concept and in order to
maintain SFE-CO2 as a clean technology, the cosolvent type (or cosolvents) should
be carefully chosen. In the decaffeination, the water and ethanol are recommended. If
possible, methanol should be avoided.
In the decaffeination using supercritical CO2, water is the main modifier used in the
extractions. In fact, water is not necessarily pumped together with CO2. In most of the
cases, the solid biomass is soaked with water before being loaded in the extraction vessels
to have a moistened biomass. This procedure was performed by Joshi et al. [5], where
900g Kangra orthodox tea was soaked with 100mL water and loaded in a vessel of
1L. The objective of using water as cosolvent stood for improving the solubility of caf-
feine, according to the behavior presented in Table 1. Since water increases the solubility
of caffeine, its single use (without CO2) is not recommendable because it removes soluble
solids (aromatic compounds) and secondary metabolites, which is a disadvantage.
Water as cosolvent was also used in the supercritical CO2 decaffeination of unroasted
coffee beans [18]. Water was used to moisten unroasted beans to a moisture content of
50% and extracted by SFE-CO2 in semicontinuous mode at 30MPa and 150°C until
reaching a final caffeine level of 0.16wt.%. Another work was performed to evaluate
the extraction conditions of caffeine from black tea while maintaining the maximum
content of phenolics [8]. In such study, a cosolvent mixture of ethanol-water was added
to supercritical CO2 at different ratios applying a high-pressure pump and all assays were
performed for 1h. The mixture ethanol-water (cosolvent) was evaluated in the following
mass proportions (%): 75:25, 87.5:12.5, and 100:0. The following cosolvent volumetric
concentrations (based on CO2) were used: 0.25%, 0.375%, and 0.5%. The authors [8]
reported that the extraction with a mixture of 87.5% ethanol and 12.5% water
(87.5:12.5) at a cosolvent concentration of 0.25% removed almost all caffeine from black
tea. The caffeine was reduced from 1283mg/100g leaves to <1mg/100g leaves. There-
fore, the ethanol (cosolvent) concentration had significant influences on both caffeine
and phenolics (P value<.01). In fact, the recovery yield of caffeine was low when
the ethanol concentration was high. Otherwise, reducing the ethanol content in
ethanol-water mixture had also decreased the content of phenolics in the leaves. This
behavior is attributed to water, which is a better cosolvent for caffeine, but also removes
other phenolic substances.
From the foregoing facts, the decaffeination using supercritical CO2 is preferable to
be performed with a certain content of modifiers (cosolvents). Even a low concentration
(e.g., 0.25%) can be very suitable because the polarity of the mixture is changed to
favor caffeine solubilization. The effects of cosolvents (types and concentration) are
attributed to a specific chemical (e.g., acid-base interactions) or physical interactions
269
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

(e.g., dipole-dipole interactions) between the modifier and target solute, and also to a
likely solvent-modifier interaction, which can influence the solvent-solute interactions.
Overall, such effects can accelerate the extractions and can make the processes more
feasible.
4.4 Economic approach
The costs related to a processing plant operated by SFE-CO2 should be estimated before the
economicviabilityofthesupercriticalprocesscanbeassessed[7].Thevariablesthatcompose
the COM are fixed costs, direct costs (related to manufacturing), and general expenses. The
mainfixedcostsincludethecostsofpurchasingtheequipment,acquiringtheaccessories,and
building the factory. Depreciation, local taxes, and insurance also compose fixed costs. The
main direct manufacturing costs include the costs of raw materials (biomass, solvent, cosol-
vent, etc.), waste treatment, operational labor, and utilities (electricity, water for washing,
cleaning material, etc.). In the same trend, the main general expenses refer to security, yard
improvement, research and development, distribution, and administration costs, among
others. All these costs are extended to decaffeination factories.
The people who are consuming totally decaffeinated or partially decaffeinated prod-
ucts generally are looking for quality and healthy products. Therefore, they do not hes-
itate in acquiring a more expensive product. Decaffeinated products are a few more
expensive because there are further processing steps to reach the required characteristics.
The decaffeination processes, especially the SFE-CO2, needs energy and robust equip-
ment to reduce the concentration of caffeine. Even though the CO2 can be recycled, a
percent fraction (generally 2%–5%) is lost during the recirculation, which is a consider-
able fraction when larger scales are considered in the evaluation. In addition, the increase
in the solvent to feed mass ratio increases the mass flow rates. Therefore, as aforemen-
tioned, the capacities of high-pressure pumps should be increased. Clearly, the increase
in capacities leads to an increase in the total production costs.
Besides being technologically feasible, a supercritical CO2 process should evidence
economic viability. Regarding the subject overviewed in this chapter, some optimization
studies were disclosed in terms of technological responses (e.g., decaffeination yield).
However, to the far of our knowledge, we could not find a study in the main database
(e.g., Scopus) that evaluated systematically the production costs of decaffeinated prod-
ucts. Overall, based on the experience, we can infer that decaffeination of several solid
matrices (tea leaves, coffee beans, guarana seeds, cocoa beans, yerba mate leaves, etc.) by
SFE-CO2 can be economically feasible because the investment cost is not the main cost
that influences the total COM. A decaffeination plant using supercritical CO2 generally is
commercially feasible at larger capacities, such as 5000tons/year. Of course, supercritical
equipment is more expensive than conventional equipment. However, the contribution
270
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

of this cost rarely exceeds 30% of the total cost because the equipment is built to last for
more than 10 years without needing significant maintenance. In fact, the main cost refers
to raw materials, such as biomass and solvents. Consequently, the main alternatives are to
reduce the purchasing costs of raw materials and to avoid losses of solvents during the
processes.
4.5 Life-cycle assessment approach
SFE-CO2 is considered as eco-friendly technology. Even having this feature, it is nec-
essary to evaluate the environmental emissions of SFE-CO2 during the decaffeination.
One form to assess the environmental impact of a process in a quantitative description
is using life-cycle assessment (LCA) analysis [19].
The LCA approach has been applied to the decaffeination of coffee with a 60/40
Arabica/Robusta mass blend [19]. The beans were moistened and the decaffeination
process consisted of SFE-CO2 at 90°C and 25MPa. During the process, the caffeine
+CO2 mixture was accumulated in a holding tank until completing the procedure.
Thereafter, the vessel started a downtime. A 97% of decaffeination rate was obtained
for 11.5h of extraction. Regarding the LCA approach, its goal was to evaluate the envi-
ronmental impacts of decaffeination of coffee using CO2. After an in-depth description
and assessment of impacts, the main real factors that contribute to the environmental
impact are agricultural stages (use of fertilizers), transportation, and caffeine
extraction steps.
When emphasizing the decaffeination step, an improved and suggested solution to
this impact refers to replacing a portion of the electricity by sustainable photovoltaic
panels. Considering a solution for these three impacts (agricultural stages—reduce fertil-
izers; transportation—use renewable fuels; caffeine extraction steps—use alternative
sources of energy), a reduction of the environmental impact can be 17.6% in terms of
human health, 16.1% in terms of resource availability, and 10.3% in terms of ecosystem
diversity.
In another work [20], an LCA analysis was also performed for the decaffeination of
coffee beans by supercritical technology. Data were obtained from an industrial com-
pany, which uses supercritical CO2 to recover caffeine from coffee beans at 90°C and
25MPa for 5h with energy, CO2, water, and fuel supply. Transportation is one of
the main factors that impact negatively the environment due to the high consumption
of fuels. Regarding the decaffeination process, its impact on the nonrenewable energy
consumption (e.g., electricity from thermoelectric plants) is related to the higher con-
sumption of energy to heat and pressurize the systems. Even though, SFE-CO2 is still
very positive if compared to other methods because it does not have a big drawback
(Fig. 4).
271
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

5. Decaffeination of coffee
Coffee is a beverage consumed worldwide because of its target bitter taste. The effect of
coffee on human physiology is different from person to person (age, gender, etc.) and also
on the quantity and quality of coffee consumed. Coffee beans have different contents of
caffeine depending on the species. For example, arabica coffee contains approximately
1.2wt.% while canephora (robusta) coffee and the hybrid arabusta coffee contain approx-
imately 2.2wt.% and 1.7wt.%, respectively. Overall, agricultural factors demonstrated to
have little effect on caffeine content in coffee beans [21].
Decaffeinated coffee is a product which caffeine has been extracted from the beans,
corresponding to roasted and ground coffee. The decaffeination process is usually fulfilled
on beans prior to roasting. For avoiding extraction of aromatic compounds, the extrac-
tion process is commonly fulfilled with green beans. For example, roasted beans have up
to 2% (mass basis) of caffeine. The decaffeination is carried out to remove approximately
97% of the caffeine to meet the requirements of a decaffeinated product. Therefore,
Fig. 4 Simply versed descriptions of the main decaffeination methods, including pros and cons of
each method.
272
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

for instance, a cup of 150mL of decaffeinated coffee has approximately 5 mg or less of
caffeine. Otherwise, a cup of 150mL of regular caffeinated coffee generally contains from
60 to 180mg of caffeine [11].
For most of people, a fatal dose of caffeine is approximately 10g or approximately
50–100 cups of regular coffee (depending on volume and strength). This excessive con-
sumption can cause excitement, restlessness, insomnia, and mild delirium, demonstrating
a hard influence on the respiratory and central nervous systems. Most of people can suffer
from sleepiness (most common), nervousness, heart stimulation, and other effects after
drinking larger quantities of caffeine [21]. Therefore, since genetically decaffeinated coffee
beans are not commercially available (i.e., ongoing scientific studies), the decaffeination of
coffee is a positive alternative to provide a decaffeinated product for coffee addicted people.
Decaffeination of coffee by SFE-CO2 is the most promising process. The removal of
caffeine can be done in batch, semicontinuous (or semibatch), or continuous modes
(Figs. 1–3). Typically, the semicontinuous mode is preferable. Previously to the extrac-
tions, the coffee beans are generally moistened (20%–50%). Cosolvents as ethanol, water
or a mixture of them can be used as polarity modifiers.
Decaffeination of coffee beans is a subject of several patents since the end of the last
century [22–24]. The SFE-CO2 was patented for the first time by Zosel in the mid-1970
for removing the caffeine from green coffee beans [25]. For instance, an invention reports
a method for the decaffeination of green coffee beans without affecting in an adverse
manner the acidity or the taste and flavor of coffee beverages [26]. According to the
inventors, prior to or simultaneously with decaffeination process, green coffee beans
can be contacted with an acidic fluid formed by an organic acid (preferably an aqueous
citric acid solution) that is not soluble in CO2. Considering that citric acid can be
dissociated in aqueous solution and that it can be inexpensively obtained in food
grades for decaffeination purposes, such acid is favorite to the decaffeination. Further-
more, according to the invention, the process conditions of SFE-CO2 are extraction
at 90°C and 28MPa for 8h and separation using 30–40°C and 7–8MPa.
When using water or an aqueous solution, coffee beans can swell, the pores usually
open, and the caffeine can diffuse out of the beans. Consequently, CO2 at supercritical
condition flowing in the bed solubilizes caffeine. After the extraction time, the beans can
be unloaded from the vessel for drying and for further use. The key factor of operation is
to optimize the extraction conditions, especially regarding the parameters discussed in
Section 4. Therefore, the operators and assistants should have the know-how for con-
trolling the high-pressure facilities of decaffeination. Also, an excellent technological
infrastructure for maintaining the plant is needed. Although the supercritical process
has a large complexity than the processes fulfilled with some liquid solvents, the clean
and positive physicochemical characteristics of supercritical CO2 expand its acceptance
by consumers. As a consequence of the high selectivity, it is asserted that decaffeinated
products obtained by SFE-CO2 have a better physicochemical and sensorial quality.
273
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

Overall, the main advantages of decaffeination of coffee by SFE-CO2 are informed in
the sequence. Firstly, there is no harmful residue in the decaffeinated coffee because CO2
becomes a gas at room conditions (e.g., 25°C and 0.1MPa) and naturally separates from
the solids after the expansion. There are no problems if some traces of CO2 remain in the
products because it is nontoxic and safe at low concentrations. Secondly, decaffeinated
coffee using supercritical CO2 has superior quality than the products obtained from other
decaffeination methods with appearance and flavor similar to that of caffeinated coffee.
Thirdly, the extraction of other compounds (phenols, amino acids, etc.) is quite low,
resulting in a greater product.
6. Decaffeination of tea
Recent innovations in food-related areas have improved the use of novel technologies for
satisfying the increased consumers’ requirements. Low-fat products, low-sugar products,
low-sodium additives, and more fibrous ingredients, among others, are examples of
healthy food products. In this trend, decaffeinated teas are also included as differentiated
products. Tea is a beverage obtained from the shoots and leaves of Camellia sinensis plants.
Decaffeinated tea products have a high commercial market as a consequence their inter-
esting healthy benefits.
Consequently, to obtain a decaffeinated tea, the leaves should undergo an extraction
procedure. As in coffee decaffeination, SFE-CO2 is preferable because it yields decaffein-
ated teas with the retained content of taste and flavors. The supercritical CO2 can pen-
etrate into the swollen pores of leaves, thus solubilizing caffeine. It is not recommendable
to use a high concentration of water or other polar cosolvents because some phenolic
compounds can be solubilized in the mixture, which is an undesired effect.
Regarding some reports in the scientific literature, a black tea with particle size rang-
ing from 600 to 780μm was processed in a pilot-scale supercritical plant with two vessels,
each one having 10L [4]. Extraction time, pressure, solvent to feed mass ratio and mod-
ifier quantity (as process parameters) had a high impact on tea decaffeination yield. From
an initial content of 2.16wt.% caffeine, a 100% decaffeination was reached at 37.5MPa,
62.5°C, 300min, 2.5% (molar basis) of ethanol as molar concentration and solvent to feed
mass ratio of approximately 1512kg/kg tea leaves (Table 3). Considering that supercrit-
ical CO2 was utilized as a solvent, there was no need to remove CO2 from decaffeinated
tea because it separates naturally from the extract at low pressures. The authors also men-
tion that it was important to attain maximum decaffeination at a relatively low temper-
ature (62.5°C) in a short time (300min) in terms of applicability of the results at
industrial scale.
Black tea has also been studied for obtaining a decaffeinated product at a pilot-scale
supercritical plant with two extractors of 5L [5]. However, in that study, the maximum
rate of decaffeination was only 40.4wt.%. The findings of low decaffeination yield are
274
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

attributed to the lower extraction time (1.5h) and solvent to feed mass ratio (6.0kg/kg tea
leaves) if compared to the findings reported by Ilgaz et al. [4]. The temperature was
higher (85°C), which could have influenced the composition of aldehydes, ketones,
alcohols, esters, and other compounds. For example, in the decaffeination by SFE-
CO2 at 85°C and 17MPa, the concentration of α-pinene reduced to 0.10wt.% if com-
pared to the fresh black tea (0.33wt.%) [5].
Green tea was decaffeinated by SFE-CO2 in a laboratory system containing a 100mL
extraction vessel [27]. The highest decaffeination yield was 82.4wt.% at 70°C and
20MPa. Ethanol (3%, mass basis) was used as a cosolvent. When either the pressure
or temperature was maintained constant, the decaffeination was high when the quantity
of modifier was high. In fact, among the parameters evaluated, the modifier concentra-
tion had the highest influence on the decaffeination efficiency. However, for a processing
line at industrial scale, further processes such as recovering chlorophylls and using them in
the reconstitution of chlorophyll contents in decaffeinated green tea can be needed to
improve its quality.
7. Decaffeination using carbon dioxide at industrial scale
In 1903, Ludwig Roselius proposed the first commercially successful decaffeination pro-
cess. In such invention, coffee beans were initially steamed with a brine solution and the
caffeine was extracted with benzene. Nowadays, benzene cannot be used as a solvent in
decaffeination process because it is toxic. Decaffeination using CO2 has been proposed
later by a scientist of the Max Plank Institute (Kurt Zosel) in mid-1970 [25]. Currently,
the SFE-CO2 at industrial scale is performed in high-volumes reactors, generally higher
than 1000L. The process is done at large scale because the demand for decaffeinated
products is high and there are several tons of raw materials to be processed per day around
the world. Overall, this process is primarily used to decaffeinate large amount of
commercial-grade and less-exotic coffee found in grocery stores. It is important to high-
light that supercritical processes for decaffeination of coffee and tea were one of the first
commercialized applications of supercritical technology at the large industrial scale.
Some companies around the world are using supercritical CO2 for decaffeination of
caffeinated biomass. One example is the Brazilian Canadian Coffee Co. Ltd. (note that
we do not have the intention of marketing any company) [28]. This company produces
decaffeinated coffee by SFE-CO2. Although the processing conditions and the total
capacities are not disclosed, the process incorporates only water (to moisturize the coffee
beans and thus making the caffeine accessible for removal) and CO2 to remove the caf-
feine and to leave the flavor. Once the coffee is 99.9% caffeine free, it is dried and ready
for roasting.
Another company is Queen Bean Coffee Company [29]. Colombian CO2 decaf, an
“Especiale” bean, is shade-grown in Colombia’s Bucaramanga region. The “Especiale”
275
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

beans are naturally 99.5wt.% decaffeinated by a patented process using supercritical CO2
that permits the beans to retain higher amount of taste and aroma than most decaffeina-
tion processes. According to the company, these beans can be softer and more delicate
than other decaffeinated coffees.
Regarding decaffeinated tea, the H€alssen and Lyon Company [30] offers different
decaffeination processes, including SFE-CO2. The company has many years (since
1935) of experience with the decaffeination of tea. The decaffeinated teas by SFE-
CO2 are produced more recently, which the process is suitable for all leaf grades and teas,
including organic teas. Once the products have been decaffeinated, they are dried back to
the original 5%–12% water content.
Although manufacturing processes may slightly differ from one factory to another, the
main steps aforementioned and presented in Figs. 1–3 (especially the semicontinuous
mode) are followed. Overall, the caffeine-rich CO2 stream that exits the extraction ves-
sels is either directed through a bed of activated charcoal (solid adsorption) or through a
water bath tower (gas absorption) to absorb the caffeine. At industrial scale, the CO2
should be recycled back to the vessel. Indeed, decaffeination by SFE-CO2 is capital-cost
intensive, but it usually provides higher yields. Interestingly, the extracted caffeine is fur-
ther processed and sold to food-related industries.
8. Future outlooks
In the whole text, we have discussed the characteristics of SFE-CO2 in order to obtain
decaffeinated products able to be consumed after the preparation of energy drinks, choc-
olate drinks and teas, among others. Supercritical CO2 is a naturally occurring nontoxic
solvent, which justifies its preference in decaffeination processes. Indeed, any decaffeina-
tion process involves some challenges, especially related to avoiding the loss of aroma and
flavor since coffee has more than 1500 compounds. Therefore, as future outlooks in this
field, it is expected to have more decaffeinated products (coffee, tea, chocolate, soda, etc.)
with and increased similarity to the caffeinated ones in terms of taste and flavor. As people
are becoming more used to quality coffee and tea, this is forcing coffee-making and tea-
making companies to find ways of enhancing the flavor even in decaffeinated products.
Regarding the technological perspectives, it is expected to have a complete decaffei-
nation using lower solvent to feed mass ratios. Consequently, it can result in smaller
extraction times and lower CO2 flow rates, which can reduce the operating costs. Also,
it is expected to maintain most of the aromatic and bioactive compounds, as phenols,
ketones, acids (e.g., chlorogenic acid), and aldehydes, among others. Although there
are several studies on the chemical composition of whole coffee and teas, little is still
known about the composition of decaffeinated coffee and teas. Therefore, another out-
look refers to the development of systematic studies to disclose the complete composition
of decaffeinated products.
276
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science

Acknowledgments
The author thanks the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES),
National Council of Technological and Scientific Development (CNPq), and the Research Support Foun-
dation of the State of Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS; 16/2551-0000522-2; 17/2551-0000 893-6) for the
financial support. G.L. Zabot thank CNPq for the productivity grant (304882/2018-6).
References
[1] A. Beri, P.K. Banipal, T.S. Banipal, Effect of potassium chloride on the solvation behavior of caffeine,
theophylline and theobromine: Volumetric, viscometric, calorimetry and spectroscopic approach,
Food Chem. 266 (2018) 110–118.
[2] E. Lack, H. Seidlitz, Economics of high pressure processes, in: A. Bertucco, G. Vetter (Eds.), High
Pressure Process Technology, Elsevier, Amsterdan, 2001.
[3] G. Brunner, Supercritical fluids: technology and application to food processing, J. Food Eng. 67 (2005)
21–33.
[4] S. Ilgaz, I.G. Sat, A. Polat, Effects of processing parameters on the caffeine extraction yield during dec-
affeination of black tea using pilot-scale supercritical carbon dioxide extraction technique, J. Food Sci.
Technol. 55 (2018) 1407–1415.
[5] R. Joshi, G.D.K. Babu, A. Gulati, Effect of decaffeination conditions on quality parameters of Kangra
orthodox black tea, Food Res. Int. 53 (2013) 693–703.
[6] M.N. Moraes, G.L. Zabot, M.A.A. Meireles, Extraction of tocotrienols from annatto seeds by a pseudo
continuously operated SFE process integrated with low-pressure solvent extraction for bixin produc-
tion, J. Supercrit. Fluids 96 (2015) 262–271.
[7] G.L. Zabot, M.N. Moraes, M.A.A. Meireles, Supercritical fluid extraction of bioactive compounds
from botanic matrices: experimental data, process parameters and economic evaluation, Recent Pat.
Eng. 6 (2012) 182–206.
[8] B. Bahar, E. Pelvan, I. Hasbay, C. Alasalvar, Decaffeinated black tea: process optimization and phenolic
profiles, J. Supercrit. Fluids 82 (2013) 116–121.
[9] F. Belliardo, A. Martelli, M.G. Valle, HPLC determination of caffeine and theophylline in Paullinia
cupana Kunth (guarana) and Cola spp. samples, Z. Lebensm. Unters. Forsch. 180 (1985) 398–401.
[10] M.D.A. Saldan˜a, C. Zetzl, R.S. Mohamed, G. Brunner, Decaffeination of guarana seeds in a micro-
extraction column using water-saturated CO2, J. Supercrit. Fluids 22 (2002) 119–127.
[11] A.S. Franca, Coffee: Decaffeination, in: B. Caballero, P. Finglas, F. Toldra (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
Food and Health, Academic Press, Cambridge, 2016.
[12] H. Peker, M.P. Srinivasan, J.M. Smith, B.J. McCoy, Caffeine extraction rates from supercritical carbon
coffee beans with dioxide, AICHE J. 38 (1992) 761–770.
[13] R.S. Mohamed, M.D.A. Saldan˜a, P. Mazzafera, C. Zetzl, G. Brunner, Extraction of caffeine, theobro-
mine, and cocoa butter from brazilian cocoa beans using supercritical CO2 and ethane, Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 41 (2002) 6751–6758.
[14] G.L. Zabot, M.N. Moraes, M.A.A. Meireles, Process integration for producing tocotrienols-rich oil
and bixin-rich extract from annatto seeds: a techno-economic approach, Food Bioprod. Process.
109 (2018) 122–138.
[15] P.I.N. Carvalho, J.F. Osorio-Tobo´n, G.L. Zabot, M.A.A. Meireles, Spatial and temporal temperature
distributions in fixed beds undergoing supercritical fluid extraction, Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Tech-
nol. 47 (2018) 504–516.
[16] H.S. Park, H.-K. Choi, S.J. Lee, K.W. Park, S.-G. Choi, K.H. Kim, Effect of mass transfer on the
removal of caffeine from green tea by supercritical carbon dioxide, J. Supercrit. Fluids 42 (2007)
205–211.
[17] J.C.F. Johner, T. Hatami, G.L. Zabot, M.A.A. Meireles, Kinetic behavior and economic evaluation of
supercritical fluid extraction of oil from pequi (Caryocar brasiliense) for various grinding times and solvent
flow rates, J. Supercrit. Fluids 140 (2018) 188–195.
277
Decaffeination using supercritical carbon dioxide

[18] Y. Chen, P.H. Brown, K. Hu, R.M. Black, R.L. Prior, B. Ou, Y.F. Chu, Supercritical CO2 decaf-
feination of unroasted coffee beans produces melanoidins with distinct NF-κB inhibitory activity,
J. Food Sci. 76 (2011) 182–186.
[19] I.D. Marco, S. Riemma, R. Iannone, Life cycle assessment of supercritical CO2 extraction of caffeine
from coffee beans, J. Supercrit. Fluids 133 (2018) 393–400.
[20] I.D. Marco, S. Riemma, R. Iannone, Supercritical carbon dioxide decaffeination process: a life cycle
assessment study, Chem. Eng. Trans. 57 (2017) 1699–1704.
[21] K. Ramalakshmi, B. Raghavan, Caffeine in coffee: its removal. why and how? Crit. Rev. Food Sci.
Nutr. 39 (1999) 441–456.
[22] S.N. Katz, J.E. Spence, M.J. O’Brien, R.H. Skiff, G.J. Vogel, R. Prasad, Decaffeination of coffee, 1991.
Patent number EP0 424 579 A1.
[23] M. Gehring, O. Vitzthum, H. Wienges, Decaffeination of roast coffee, 1984. Patent number DE 33 03
679 A1.
[24] S.N. Katz, Decaffeination Process, 1984. Patent number US 4 472 442.
[25] K. Zosel, Process for recovering caffeine, 1974. Patent number US 3806619.
[26] P.T. Kazlas, R.D. Novak, R.J. Robey, Supercritical carbon dioxide decaffeination of acidified coffee,
1994. Patent number US5288511A.
[27] H.S. Park, N.G. Im, K.H. Kim, Extraction behaviors of caffeine and chlorophylls in supercritical dec-
affeination of green tea leaves, Food Sci. Technol. 45 (2012) 73–78.
[28] Braziliancoffeeco, Decaffeination Process, Available from: http://braziliancoffeeco.com, 2018.
[29] Queenbean, Natural Decaffeination: Swiss Water and CO2 Processes, Available from: https://www.
thequeenbean.com, 2018.
[30] Haelssen-lyon, Decaffeinated tea, Available from: https://www.haelssen-lyon.com, 2018.
[31] P.V. Gadkari, M. Balaraman, Mass transfer and kinetic modelling of supercritical CO2 extraction of
fresh tea leaves (Camellia sinensis L.), Braz. J. Chem. Eng. 34 (2017) 799–810.
[32] V.A. Golubev, M.Y. Nikiforov, G.A. Alper, Solubility of caffeine in the supercritical CO2-methanol
binary solvent, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. 9 (2014) 1054–1058.
[33] B. Li, W. Guo, W. Song, E.D. Ramsey, Interfacing supercritical fluid solubility apparatus with super-
critical fluid chromatography operated with and without on-line post-column derivatization: deter-
mining the solubility of caffeine and monensin in supercritical carbon dioxide, J. Supercrit. Fluids
115 (2016) 17–25.
[34] Y. Iwai, H. Nagano, G.S. Lee, M. Uno, Y. Arai, Measurement of entrainer effects of water and ethanol
on solubility of caffeine in supercritical carbon dioxide by FT-IR spectroscopy, J. Supercrit. Fluids
38 (2006) 312–318.
[35] P.V. Gadkari, M. Balaraman, Solubility of caffeine from green tea in supercritical CO2: a theoretical and
empirical approach, J. Food Sci. Technol. 52 (2015) 8004–8013.
[36] H. Lentz, M. Gehrig, J. Schulmeyer, Dynamic solubility measurements of caffeine in carbon dioxide
and in carbon dioxide saturated with water, Phys. B+C 139-140 (1986) 70–72.
[37] U. Kopcak, R.S. Mohamed, Caffeine solubility in supercritical carbon dioxide/co-solvent mixtures,
J. Supercrit. Fluids 34 (2005) 209–214.
[38] W.-J. Kim, J.-D. Kim, J. Kim, S.-G. Oh, Y.-W. Lee, Selective caffeine removal from green tea using
supercritical carbon dioxide extraction, J. Food Eng. 89 (2008) 303–309.
[39] E. Cassel, R.M.F. Vargas, G.W. Brun, D.E. Almeida, L. Cogoi, G. Ferraro, R. Filip, Supercritical fluid
extraction of alkaloids from Ilex paraguariensis St. Hil, J. Food Eng. 100 (2010) 656–661.
278
Green sustainable process for chemical and environmental engineering and science
